1:20 Logos Machine Translation System Logos Corporation has been involved in machine translation R&D for over 27 years.
2:20 From an English-Vietnamese system produced in 1972 to the latest releases of our software we have striven to produce the best machine translation (MT) software available.
3:20 Today the Logos system is one of the best commercial MT systems on the market.
4:20 Our architecture coupled with experience in the commercial sector has made us a leader in providing solutions in our users' translation work.
5:20 Logos does not claim to replace human translators; rather, we seek to enhance the professional translator's work environment.
6:20 The Logos system is fundamentally different from other computer-based translation programs.
7:20 In addition to the easily extensible dictionaries with their underlying semantic foundation, Logos offers mechanisms that permit meanings to be deduced using contextual clues.
8:20 These permit problem cases, such as concepts with completely separate meanings or subtle variations, to be translated suitably.
9:20 Logos analyzes whole source sentences, considering morphology, meaning, and grammatical structure and function.
10:20 The analysis determines the semantic relationships between words as well as the syntactic structure of the sentence.
11:20 Parsing is only source language-specific; generation is target language-specific.
12:20 Although the Logos system was originally developed on the basis of a transfer approach, this has evolved in time to the present in which clear intedingual features are inherent in the system.
13:20 Unlike other commercial systems the Logos system relies heavily on semantic analysis.
14:20 Using our proprietary Semantico-Syntactic Abstraction Language (SAL) the parser is able to achieve better results than syntactic analysis alone would allow.
15:20 This comprehensive analysis permits the Logos system to construct a complete and idiomatically correct translation in the target language.
16:20 All aspects of the sentence contribute to the result.
17:20 The Logos system is an outstanding example of applying computational linguistics in the commercial sector.

