Improving SMT quality with morpho-syntactic analysis Sonja Nieflcn and Hcrmann Ney Lehrstuhl fiir hflbrlnatik VI Computer Science Department RWTH University of Technology Aachen D-52056 Aachen, Germany Email: niessen@in£ormatik, rwth-aachen, de Abstract In the framework of statistical machine translation (SMT), correspondences between the words in the source and the target language are learned from bilingual corpora on the basis of so-called alignment mode, Is.
Many of the statistical systems use little or no linguistic knowledge to structure the underlying models.
In this paper we argue that training data is typically not large enough to sutficiently represent the range of different phenomena in natural languages and that SMT can take advantage of the explicit introduction of some knowledge about the lmlgnages under consideration.
The improvement of the translation results is demonstrated on two ditferent German-English corpora.
1 Introduction
In this pal)er, we address the question of how morl)hological and syntactic analysis can help statistical machine translation (SMT).
In our apl)roach, we introduce several transtbrmations to the source string (in our experiments the source language is German) to demonstrate how linguistic knowledge can improve translation resuits especially in the cases where, the tokentype ratio (nmnber of training words versus nmnber of vocabulary entries) is unthvorable.
After reviewing the statistical approach to machine translation, we first explain our motivation for examining additional knowledge sources.
We then present our approach in detail.
Ext)erimental results on two bilingual GermanEnglish tasks are reported, namely the VERBMOBIL and the EUTRANS task.
Finally, we give an outlook on our fllture work.
2 Statistical
Machine Translation The goal of the translation process in statistical machine translation can l)e fornmlated as tbllows: A source language string.f~ = fl... f.! is to be translated into a target language string c\[ =el... el.
In the experiments reported in this paper, the source language is German and the target language is English.
Every English string is considered as a possible translation for the intmt.
If we assign a probability P'r(e\[lfi/) to each pair of strings (el, fi/), then according to Bayes' decision rule, we have to choose the English string that maximizes the I)roduct of the English language model Pr(c) and the string translation model r'r(fff\[e).
Many existing systems tbr SMT (Wang and Waibel, 1997; Niefien et al., 1.(/98; Och and Weber, 1998) make use of a special way of structuring the string translation model (Brown et al., 1993): 'l?he correspondence between the words in the source and the target string is described by aligmuents that assign one target word position to each source word position.
The probability of a certain English word to occur in the target string is assumed to depend basically only on the source word aligned to it.
It is clear that this assumption is not always valid tbr the translation of naturM languages.
It turns out that even those approaches that relax the wordby-word assumption like (Och et al., 1999) have problems with lnany phenomena typical of natural languages in general and German in partitular like • idiomatic expressions; • colnpound words that have to be translated by more than one word; • long range dependencies like prefixes of verbs placed at the end of the sentence; • ambiguous words with different meanings dependent on the context.
1081 Tile parameters of the statistical knowledge sources nlentioned above are trained on bilingual corpora.
Bearing ill mind that more than 40% of the word tbrms have only been seen once in training (see q~,bles 1 and 4), it is obvious that the phenomena listed above can hardly be learned adequately from the data and that the explicit introduction of linguistic knowledge is expected to improve translation quality.
The overall architecture of the statistical translation approach is depicted in Figure 1.
hi this figure we already anticipate the t'aet that we will transtbrm the source strings in a certain manner.
If necessary we can also apply the inverse of these transfbrmations on the produced output strings.
Ill Section 3 we explain in detail which kinds of transtbrmations we apply.
Source Language Text 1 QTransformation ) 1' fl Global Search: maximize Pr(el).
Pr(f~ lel) over e I 1 I l Target Language Text l J I ~ Lexicon Model Pr(l 1 \]e,) \[ Alignment Model \] Language Model Figure 1.: Architecture of the translation 31)preach based on Bwes' decision rule.
3 Analysis
and Transformation of the Input As already pointed ouL we used the inethod of transforming the inl)ut string in our experiments.
The advantage of this approach is that existing training and search procedures did not have to be adapted to new nlodels incorporating the information under consideration.
On the other hand, it would be more elegant to leave the decision between different readings, tbr instance, to the overall decision process in search.
Tile transtbrmation method however is nlore 3(tequate tbr the preliminary identification of those phenonmna relevant tbr improving the translation results.
3.1 Analysis
We used GERTWOL, a German Morphological Analyser (Haapalainen and M~@)rin, 1995) and the Constraint Grammar Parser Ibr German GERCG tbr lexical analysis and inorphological and syntactic dismnbiguation.
For a description of the Constraint Grammar approach we refer the reader to (Karlsson, 1990).
Some prel)rocessing was necessary to meet the input format requirements of the tools, hi the cases where the tools returned lnore thalt one reading, either simple heuristics based on domain specific pretbrence ruh;s where at)plied or a nlore general, non-mnbiguous analysis was used.
In the following subsections we list some transtbrmations we have tested.
3.2 Separated
German Verbprefixes Sortie verbs in German consist of a main part and a detachable prefix which can be shifted to the end of the clause, e.g.
"losfahren" ("to leave") in the sentence "Ich fahre morgen los.".
We extr~cted all word forms of separable verbs fl:om th.e training corl)us.
The resulting list contains entries of the tbrm prefixlmain.
The entry "los\[t:'ahre" indicates, fi)r exalnple, that the prefix "los" (:an l)e detached flom the word tbrm "fahre".
In all clauses containing a word matching a main part and a word matching the corresponding prefix part occuring at the end of the clause, the prefix is prepended to the beginning of the main part, as in "Ich losfahre morgen".
a.a German Compound Words German comt)(mnd words pose special 1)roblems to the robustness of a translation method, because the word itself must be represented in the training data: the occurence of each of the coint)onents is not enough.
The word "I~'iichtetee" tbr example can not be translated although its coml)onents "Friichte" and "Tee" appear in the training set of EUTRANS.
Besides, even if the coml)ound occurs in training, tile training algorithm may not be capable of translating it properly as two words (in the nlentioned case the words "fl'uit" and "tea") due to the word alignment assumption mentioned in Section 2.
We 1082 therefore split the COml)ound words into their (:Oml)onents.
3,,4 Annotation with POS Tags ()he way of hell)|rig the disanfl)iguation of gillt)Jguous words is to annotate them with their t)m:l; of Sl)eech (POS) inl'()rmation.
We (:hose l;he tbllowing very ti'equent short words that often (:;rased errors in translation fi)r VERBMO\]3IL: "aber" can 1)e adverb or (:onjun('tion.
"zu" can l)e adverb, pret)osition, sepnrated verb prefix or infinitive marker.
%ler', "die" and "das" cnn 17e definite m:tiCIos el' \])1"Ol1Ol111S.
'.\['he difficulties due to l;hese aml)iguities m:e illustrated by the fi)lh)wing exmnt)les: The sentence "Das wiird(' mir sehr gut 1)~ssen.
'' is often trnnslnted 1)y "Th, e would suit me very well".
iltsl;e;~(l ()\[ "5l'h,at would suit me very well".
and "Das win: zu s(:lmcll".
is trnnsl;~ted by "Th~Lt was to t'~lsl;".
instea,(t of "Theft; was too f;~st;.".
We alTpended the POS l;~g in training a,mt t(;st corpus fiTr the VERBMOBII, task (see 4.\]).
3.5 Merging
Phrases Some multi-word phrases as ~ whole rel)r(;sent a distine(; synta.7"tie rob; in (;he s(mtenT:e.
The 17hra.se "irgend ('.t;w;ls" (%nything") for exa,mt)1(; m~y form ('it, l,('a: a.n in(h'tinit;('.
(h'.t;('.rmino.r ():c an in(lelinil;e pronoun.
Like 2\] other mull;iword tThrases "irg(:nd-et;wa.s" is merged in order t;o form one single voca,bulary ('nl;ry.
3.6 Treatment
of Unseen Words l"or sl;atist;i(::fl ma(:hin(; tr;mslation it is difficult 1;() handle woi'ds not seen in training.
\]~br m> kllOWll i)l;O1)el; ll&llIeS~ i\[; is normally ('(TrreT't to t)bme the word un(;h~mge(t into th(; transl~fl;ion.
We have t)(;(;n working on the l;17ea~l;nlenI; of 1111kll()Wll words of other types.
As ~flr(;~dy menl;ioned in Se(:l;ion 3.3, the st)litting of eomt)ound words cml reduce |;he nmnber of unknown Cl(:rman words.
In addition, we have examined methods of r(> pl~('ing a word \['ullform l)y ~ more ;O)stra('l; word form nnd (-heek whether this fi)rm is kn()wn and (:;~m l)e I;ranslnted.
Th(' l;rmlslat, ioll of the sin> |)lifted word tbrm is generally not the precis(' trmlslai;ion of the original on(', 17ul; sometimes the intended semantics is conveyed, e.g.: "kaltes" is ~m adjective in the singular neuter fOl;lll &lid.
c3~11 be t,l'a, nst:'ornled to the less specilic form "kalt" ("cold").
"Jahre" ("years") (:~m be replaced by the singulm: form "J~fln:".
"beneidest" (%o envy" in tirst person singular): if the infinitive tbnn "beneiden" is not known, it might hell).just, to remove tim leading t)artiele "be".
4 Translation
Results We use the SSER (sul)jectivc sentence error rat(') (Ni('fien et al., 2000) as evaluation crit('rion: E~wh translated senten(:e is judged by ~ tmmmi exmniner according 1;(7 nn error scale ti'om 0.0 (semantically and syntaeti(:~flly col reef) to 1.0 ((:onlt)h;l;ely wrong).
4.1 Translation
Results for VEm~MOmL Th(, VEIBM()BII, corpus consists of st)onttmeously spoken dialogs in t;he al)t)oint;ment sch(> (hfling domain (Wtflflster, 1993).
German sent;ences ;~re l;ra.nsl;~lx;d inl;o English.
The output of the st)ee('h re(:ognizer (Ibr example th(; singlebest hyl)othesis ) is used as int)ut to the tr;mslation moduh',s.
For resem:eh tmri/oses the original l;(;xt st)oken 1)y th(, users can t)7, t)r(;sented t() the translal;ion system t;(7 ev~flm~te the MT (:omponent set)er~ti;ely from l;hc, re(:ognizT~r.
'l'h('. tra.ining set (:onsist;s (Tf d5 680 s(;nl;o.n(:e pairs.
Testing was carried out on ~t seper~te set of 14:7 senl;enees l;h~fl; (to not contain any mlseen words, hi Table 1 l;he ehara('teristics of the training sets are summarized for l;he original eort)ns and after l;he ai)plication of the des(:rit)ed tr~Lnsfornlat;ion.s on t;he Gerlll}~tll part of l;he col pus.
\[l.'he tM)le shows that on t;his cou)us Ill(', splitting of (:Oml)OUll(ts iinl)roves l;hc l;oken-tyl)e rntio tiom 59.7 t(7 65.2, lint th(', mmfl)er of singh;tons (words s(;en only on('e in tt'nhfing) does not go down by more than 2.8%.
'.l'he oth.er transfi)rm~tions (i)r(;1)ending separated verb 1)refixe,~ "t)ref"; mineral;ion wi|;h 1)OS t~gs "i)os"; merging of phrases "merge") do not at\[bet these co> pus st;,l;isl;ies much.
The translntion l)erformmme results are given in rl2~fi)le 2 tbr tra.nslat;ion of text and in 'l~fi)le 3 for translation of t;he single-best hyl)oth(!sis given t)y a sl)eech recognizer (a('(:m:a.('y 69%).
For t)oth cases, l;r;mslation on text ml(t on st)ee(:h int)ut, st)litting (:oml)oml(t words does 1083 Table 1: Corpus statistics: VERBMOBIL training ( "baseline" =no preprocessing).
preprocessing English 465 143 Gerlnan baseline verb prefixes split compounds pos pos+merge pos+merge+pref no.
of no.
of singletokens types tons 4382 37.6% 437968 7335 44.8% 435 686 7370 44.3% 442938 6794 42.0% 437972 7 344 44.8% 437330 7363 44.7% 435055 7397 44.2% not iml)rove translation quality, but it is not harmful either.
The treatment of separable prefixes helps as does annotating some words with part of speech inibrmation.
Merging of 1)hrases does not improve the quality much further.
The best translations were adfieved with the combination of POS-annotation, phrase merging and prepending separated verb prefixes.
This holds tbr t)oth translation of text and of speech input.
Table 2: Results on VERBMOBIL text intmt.
preprocessing SSER \[%\] baseline verb prefixes split compounds pos pos+merge pos+merge+pref 20.3 19.4 20.3 19.7 19.5 18.0 The fact that these hard-coded transtbrmations are not only hclpflfl on text input, but also on speech input is quite encouraging.
As an example makes clear this cannot be taken for granted: The test sentence "Dann fahren wir dann los".
is recognized as "Dam1 fahren wir dann uns".
and the tact that separable verbs do not occur in their separated form in the training data is mffavorable in this case.
The figures show that in generM the speech recognizer output contains enough information for helpflfl preprocessing.
Table 3: Results on VERBMOBIL speech inlmt.
preprocessing baseline verb prefixes split compounds split+pref pos+merge+pref ssEa \[%1 43.4 41.8 43.1 42.3 41.1 4.2 Translation Results for EUTRANS The EUTRANS corpus consists of different types of German-English texts belonging to the tourism domain: web pages of hotels, touristic brochures and business correspondence.
The string translation and language model parameters were trained on 27 028 sentence pairs.
The 200 test sentences contain 150 words never seen in training.
Table 4 summarizes the corpus statistics of the training set for the original corpus, after splitting of compound words and after additional prepending of seperated verb prefixes ("split+prefixes").
The splitting of compounds improves the token-type ratio flom 8.6 to 12.3 and the nmnber of words seen only once in training reduces by 8.9%.
Table 4: Corpus statistics: EUTRANS.
preprocessing no.
of tokens English 562 264 German baseline split compounds split+prefixes 499 217 535 505 534 676 no.
of singletypes tons 33 823 47.1% 58317 58.9% 43 405 50.0% 43 407 49.8% Tile mlmber of words in the test sentences never seen in training reduces from 150 to 81 by compound splitting and can further be reduced to 69 by replacing the unknown word forms by more general forms.
80 unknown words are encountered when verb prefixes are treated in addition to compound splitting.
Experiments for POS-annotation have not been pertbrmed on this corpus because no small set of ambiguous words causing many of the 1084 translation errors on this |;ask can be identified: Comt)ared to |;it(', VERBMOBIL task, this tort)us is less homogeneous.
Merging of 1)hrases did not help much on VEI/,BMOBIL and is theretbre not tested here.
Tal)le 5 shows that the splitting of comt)ound words yields an improvement in the subjective sentence error rate of 4.5% and the treatment of unknown words ("unk") improves the translation quality by an additional 1%.
Treating SOl)arable verb 1)refixes in addition to splitting compounds gives the be, st result so far with an improvement of 7.1% absolute COml)ared to the l)aseline.
Table 5: Results on EUTRANS.
1)ret)rocessing SSER \[%\] 1)aseline 57.4 split comi)ounds 52.9 sl) lit+lmk 51.8 split+prefixes 50.3 5 Conclusion and Future Work In this paper, we have presented some methods of providing morphological aim syntactic intbrmat|on tbr improving the 1)ertbrmance of statistical machine trallslation.
First ext)eriments prove their general aplflicalfility to reMistic and comI)lex tasks such as spontaneously spoken dialogs.
We are.
1)lamfing to integrate the al)t)roach into the search process.
We are also working on language models and translation models that use mort)hological categories for smoothing in the case of unseen events.
Acknowledgement. This work was partly supported by the German FederM Ministry of Education, Science, Research and Technology under the Contract Number 01 IV 701 q_'4 (VERBMOBIL) and as part of the EUTRANS project by the European Comnmnity (ESPRIT project number 30268).
The authors would like to thank Gregor Leusch tbr his support in implementation.

