Probabilistic Parsing and Psychological Plausibility Thorsten Brants and Matthew Crocker Saarland University, COlnl)U|;al;ional Linguistics D-6G041 Saarbriicken, Germany {brants, crocker}@coi±, un±-sb, de Abstract Given the recent evidence for prot)abilistic mechanisms in models of hmnan aml)iguity resolution, this paper investigates the plausibility of exl)loiting current wide-coverage, 1)robal)ilistic 1)arsing techniques to model hmnan linguistic t)ert'orman(:e.
In l)arl.i(:ulm ', we investigate the, t)crforlnance of stan(tar(l stoclmstic parsers when they arc revis(;(l to el)crate incrementally, and with reduced nlenlory resources.
We t)resent techniques for ranking and filtering mlMyses, together with exl)erimental results.
Our results confirm that stochastic parsers which a(lhere to these 1)sy('hologically lnotivated constraints achieve goo(l l)erf()rman(:e.
Memory cast t)e reduce(t (lown to 1% ((:Oml)are(l to exhausitve search) without reducing recall an(l 1)rox:ision.
A(lditionally, thes(; models exhil)it substamtially faster l)ertbrmance.
FinMly, we ~rgue that this generM result is likely to hold for more sophisticated, nnd i)sycholinguistically plausil)le, probal)ilistic parsing models.
1 Introduction
Language engineering and coml)ut~tional psycholinguistics are often viewed as (list|net research progrmnmes: engineering sohttions aim at practical methods which ('an achieve good 1)erformance, typically paying little attention to linguistic or cognitive modelling.
Comlmtational i)sycholing,fistics, on the other hand, is often focussed on detailed mo(lelling of human lmhaviour tbr a relatively small number of well-studied constructions.
In this paper we suggest that, broadly, the human sentence processing mechanism (HSPM) and current statisti(:al parsing technology can be viewed as having similar ol)jectives: to optimally (i.e.
ral)idly and accurately) understand l;he text and utl;erances they encounter.
Our aim is to show that large scale t)robabilistic t)arsers, when subjected to basic cognitive constraints, can still achieve high levels of parsing accuracy.
If successful, this will contribute to a t)lausil)h; explanation of the fact th~tt I)(;() \])lc, in general, are also extremely accurate and rol)llS(;.
Sllch a 1'o81111; Wollld also strellgthclt existing results showing that related l)robal)ilistic lne('hanisms can exl)lain specific psycholinguistic phenomena.
To investigate this issue, we construct a standard 'l)aseline' stochastic parser, which mirrors t;he pertbrmance of a similar systems (e.g.
(,lohnson, 1998)).
We then consider an increre(total version of th(', parser, and (;v~,htat(; tim etf'c(:ts of several l)rol)al)ilistic filtering strategies which m'e us(,(l to 1)rune the l)arser's search space, and ther(;l)y r('(lu('(', memory load.
rio &,,-;sess th(; generMity of oltr resnll;s for more Sol)histi(;ate(t prot)al)ilistic models, we also conduct experiments using a model in which parent-node intbrmation is encoded on the (laughters.
This increase in contextual information has t)(;(;11 shown 1;o improve t)erforlnance (.Johnson, 1998), and the model is also shown to be rolmst to the inerementality and memory constraints investigated here.
We present the results of parsing pertbrmance ext)eriments, showing the accuracy of these systems with respect to l)oth a parsed corpus and the 1)aseline parser.
Our experiments suggest that a strictly incremental model, in which memory resources are substantially reduced through filtering, can achieve l)recision and recall which equals that of 'unrestricted' systems.
Furthermore, implementation of these restrictions leads to substantially faster 1)(;rtbrmance.
In (:onchlsion, we argue that such 1)road-coverage probabilistic parsing 111 models provide a valuable framework tbr explaining the human capacity to rapidly, accurately, and robustly understand "garden variety" language.
This lends further supt)ort to psycholinguistic accounts which posit probabilistic ambiguity resolution mechanisms to explain "garden path" phenomena.
It is important to reiterate that our intention here is only to investigate the performance of probabilistic parsers under psycholinguistically motivated constraints.
We do not argue for the psychological plausibility of SCFG parsers (or the parent-encoded variant) per se.
Our investigation of these models was motivated rather by our desire to obtain a generalizable result for these simple and well-understood models, since obtaining similar results for more sophisticated models (e.g.
(Collins, 1996; Ratnaparkhi, 199711 might have been attributed to special properties of these models.
Rather, the current result should be taken as support tbr the potential scaleability and performance of probabilistic I)sychological models such as those proposed by (aurafsky, 1996) and (Crocker and Brants, to appear).
2 Psycholinguistic
Motivation Theories of human sentence processing have largely been shaped by the study of pathologies in tnnnan language processing behaviour.
Most psycholinguistic models seek to explain the dfficulty people have in comprehending structures that are ambiguous or memory-intensive (see (Crocker, 1999) for a recent overview).
While often insightflfl, this approach diverts attention from the fact that people are in fact extremely accnrate and effective in understanding the vast majority of their "linguistic experience".
This observation, combined with the mounting psycholinguistic evidence for statistically-based mechanisms, leads us to investigate the merit of exploiting robust, broad coverage, probabilistie parsing systems as models of hmnan linguistic pertbrmance.
The view that hmnan language processing can be viewed as an optimally adapted system, within a probabilistic fl'amework, is advanced by (Chater et al., 19981, while (Jurafsky, 19961 has proposed a specific probabilistic parsing model of human sentence processing.
In work on human lexical category disambiguation, (Crocker and Corley, to appear), have demonstrated that a standard (iimrmnental) HMM-based part-of-speech tagger models the finding from a range of psycholinguistic experiments.
In related research, (Crocker and Brants, 19991 present evidence that an incremental stochastic parser based oll Cascaded Markov Models (Brants, 1999) can account tbr a range of experimentally observed local ambiguity preferences.
These include NP/S complement ambiguities, reduced relative clauses, noun-verb category ambiguities, and 'that'-ambiguities (where 'that' can be either a complementizer or a determiner) (Crocker and Brants, to appear).
Crucially, however, there are differences between the classes of mechanisms which are psychologically plausible, and those which prevail in current language technology.
We suggest that two of the most important differences concern incrcmentality~ and memory 7vso'urces.
There is overwhehning experimental evidence that people construct connected (i.e.
semantically interpretable) analyses for each initial substring of an utterance, as it is encountered.
That is, processing takes place incrementally, from left to right, on a word by word basis.
Secondly, it is universally accecpted that people can at most consider a relatively small number of competing analyses (indeed, some would argue that number is one, i.e. processing is strictly serial).
In contrast, many existing stochastic parsers are "unrestricted", in that they are optinfised tbr accuracy, and ignore such t)sychologically motivated constraints.
Thus the appropriateness of nsing broad-coverage probabilistic parsers to model the high level of human performance is contingent upon being able to maintain these levels of accuracy when the constraints of" incrementality and resource limirations are imposed.
3 Incremental
Stochastic Context-Free Parsing The fbllowing assumes that the reader is familiar with stochastic context-free grammars (SCFG) and stochastic chart-parsing techniques.
A good introduction can be found, e.g., in (Manning and Schfitze, 19991.
We use standard abbreviations for terminial nodes, 11051terminal nodes, rules and probabilities.
112 This t)tq)er invcsl;igates stochastic (;onl;(;xl;fl'ee parsing l)ascd on ~ grmmmu" (;hat is (tcrivc(l from a trcel)ank, starting with 1)art-ofsl)eech ta,gs as t(;rlninals.
The gl:;~nllnt~r is (lcriv(;d l)y (:olle(:ting M1 rul('.s X -+ c~ th;tt oc(:ur in the tr(',(;bank mM (;heir ffe(lU(m(:i('~s f.
The l)l'()l);tl)ilil;y of a rule is set to.f(x l'(x (:l) E .f(x fl \],br ~ descril)l;ion of treebank grammars see (Charniak, 1.996).
The gr~mmmr does not coiita.in c-rules, oth(:rwis(: th(:r(: is no restriction oll the rules.
In particular, w(: do not r(:quir(' C homsky-NormM-Form.
In addition to the rult:s tha(; corr(:st)ond (;o sl;rucl;ur(:s in th(: corpus, w(: a.dd ;~ new st~u:l; sylnl)ol ROOT to l;h(; grnmmar and rules ROOT -~ X for all non-t;(;rminals X togel;lwx with l)rol)al)iliti('s (h:):iv(:d l'roln th(: root n()(t(:s in th(: tort)us I.
For t)m:sing th(:se gr~unmn)'s, w(: r(:ly upon n stan(tard l)oLi;onl-U t) (:ha.rl,-t)arsing t(:(:hniqu(: with n modification for in(:rcmental parsing, i.(:., tbt" each word, all edges nr(: proc(:ss(:d and l)ossib\]y 1)run(:d 1)(:ti)r(: \])ro(:e(:(ling to the next word.
Th(: outlilm of th(: Mgorithm is as follows.
A (:hart; (:ntry 1~ (:onsists of a sl;;u:I, aim (:n(l 1)osition i ;rod j, a (tott(:d rul(: X ~ (~:.'7, tim insi(t(: l)rol)nl)ility fl(Xi,.j) thud; X g(:n(:ra.tx:s l;ll(: t(:rmihal string from t)osi(:ion i to .7, mM information M)out th(: most l)robat)\](: ilL~i(t(' stru(:i;ur(:.
1t7 th(: dot of th(: dotte(t ruh: is nt th(' rightmost i)osition, the corresl)ondillg (:(lg(: is an inactive edg(:.
If the (tot is at mty other 1)osition, il; is mt,,ctivc, edge.
Imu:l;ivo, e(tgcs repr(',scnt re('ogniz(',d hypo(:heti(:a,1 constituents, whil(; a(:tiv(; (;(lg(',s r(;1)r(;s(:nt 1)r(:lixes of hyl)ol;heticM (:()llsi;it;ll(:lll;s.
Th(: ith t(:rminal nod(: I,i l;lla, t; (:nt(:rs th(: (:hart gencra, tcs an inactive edge for l;\]m span (i 1, i).
Ba, sed on this, n(;w active mid inactive (;(lges are generated according to the stan(t~tr(t algorithm.
Sine(: we are ilfl;(:r(:stcd in th(: most i)robM)le pars(:, the chart can be minimized in th(: tbllowing way whik: sti\]l 1)crfi)rming an ('xhaustiv(: search.
If" ther(: is mor(: l;hm~ one (:(lg(~ that covers a span (i,j) having (;h(', sa, me non-t(:rminM symbol on th(; lefIAmnd side of th(: (to(,(x:(l rule, 1The ROOT node is used int;ernally fl)r parsing; it is neither emitted nor count,ed for recall and l)recision.
only the one with the highest inside prol)M)ility is k(;1)t ill tit(; (:\]mrt.
The others cmmot contrilmt(; to th(; most i)rol)M)le 1)nrse..
For an ina('tiv(: edge si)aiming i to j and rei)rcs(mting the rule X --> y1...yq~ the inside l)robM)ility/31 is set to \[d il = 1"(x -+ H (2) /=\] wher(: il and jl mm'k the start and end t)ostition of Yl having i = il nnd j = Jr.
The insid(: prol)M)ility tbr an active cdg(: fiA with the dot after th(: kth syml)ol of th(: right-hmM side is sol, to k II <r ' t It il,jl} (3) l-d W(: (lo not use the t)rol)M)i\]ity of th(: rule a.t this point.
This allows us to ('oral)in(: a.ll (:(Ig(:s with (;h(: sam(: st)m~ and th(: dot al; th(: sam(: 1)osition but with (liiI'er(:uI; symbols on the l(,ft-hmM side.
Jntrodu(:ing a distinguish(:(1 M't-hand sid(: only for in~mtiv(: (:(lg('s significantly r(:du(;(:s th(: nun> b(:r of a(:(;iv(: (:dg(:s in the (:hm't.
This goes one st, e t) furth(:r than lint)licitly right-1)inarizing th(: grmmnar; not only suilix(:s of right-hmM si(h:s are join(:(t, but also l;hc ('orr(:sponding l(:fi;-hand sid(:s.
d Memory Restrictions \¥(: inv(:stig~rt(: th(: (dimin~I;ion (pruning) ()f edges from th(: ('hnrt in our in('r(:nl(:n|;a| \])re'sing sch(:m(:.
Aft(:r processing a word and b(:fi))'(: 1)roc(:cding to the n(:xt word during incremental 1)re:sing, low rnnk(,d edges ~r(: removed.
This is (:(luivM(:lfl; t;() imposing m(:mory rcsia'ictions on the t)ro(:('ssing system.
The, original algorithm k('ei)s on(; edge in th(: (:hart fi)r each (:oml)ination of span (start and cn(l position) ~md non-tcrmimd symbol (for inactive edges) or right-hand side l)r(:fixcs of (lot;te(t rules (for active edges).
With 1)tinting, we restric(; the mmfl)cr of edges allowed per span.
The limit~tion (:an b(: cxi)resscd in two ways: 1.
Va'riable bcam,.
Sch:ct a threshold 0 > 1.
Edg(: c.
is removed, ill its 1)rol)ability is p~:, I;lm 1)csl; l)rol)M)ility fi)r the span is Pl, and v,; < pl_.
(~l) 0 113 2.
Fixed beam.
Select a maximum number of edges per span m.
An edge e is removed, if its prot)ability is not in the first m highest probabilities tbr edges with the same span.
We pertbrmed exl)eriments using both types of beauls.
Fixed beams yielded consistently better results than variable beams when t)lotting chart size vs.
F-score. Thereibre, the following results are reported tbr fixed t)eams.
We, compare and rank edges covering the same span only, and we rank active and inactive edges separately.
This is in contrast to (Charniak et al., 1998) who rank all edges.
They use nornmlization in order to account tbr different spans since in general, edges for longer spans involve more nmltiplications of t)robabil ities, yielding lower probabilities.
Charniak et al.'s normalization value is calculated by a dilferent probability model than the inside probabilities of the edges.
So, in addition to the normalization for different span lengths, they need a normalizatio11 constant that accounts tbr the different probability models.
This investigation is based on a much simt)ler ranking tbrmula.
We use what can be described as the unigram probability of a non-terminal node, i.e., the a priori prot)ability of the col resl)onding non-ternlinal symbol(s) times the inside t)robat)ility.
Thus, fi~r an inactive edge (i, j, X --> (~,/31(Xi,j)}, we use the l)rob~fl)ility Pm(Xi,j) = P(X) . P(tg...tj_IIX) (5) = for ranking.
This is the prol)ability of the node and its yield being present in a parse.
The higher this value, |;lie better is this node.
flI is the inside probability for inactive edges as given in eqnation 2, P(X) is the a priori probability tbr non-terminal X, (as estimated from the frequency in the training COrlmS) and Pm is the probability of the edge tbr the non-terminal X spanning positions i to j that is used tbr ranking.
For an active edge {i,j,X --~ y1 ...yk.
yk+l ym, y) k • " ~,,~ )) "'" ~A( il,jl (the (tot is aI" ter the kth symbol of llSe: the right-hand side) we (7) = P(YI...Yk).flA(EI~,:h...Yi~,jk) (9) p(yl,,, yk) can be read ()If the corpus.
It is the a priori probability that the right-hand side of a production has the prefix y1 ...
y/c, which is estilnated by f(yl ...
yt~ is prefix) 00) N where N is the total number of productions in the corpus 2, i = ij, j = j/~ and flA is the inside probability of the pretix.
5 Experiments
5.1 Data We use sections 2 21 of the Wall Street JourlYecl)ank (Marcus el; al., nal part of' the Penn ~ " 1993) to generate a treebank grammar.
Traces, flmctional tags and other tag extensions that do not mark syntactic category are removed before training 3.
No other modifications are made.
For testing, we use the \] 578 sentences of length 40 or less of section 22.
The input to the parser is the sequence of i)art-ofspeech tags.
5.2 Evaluation
For evaluation, we use the parsewfi measures and report labeld F-score (the harmolfiC mean of labeled recall and labeled precision).
R.eporting the F-score makes ore" results comt)aral)le to those of other previous experinmnts using the same data sets.
As a nleasure of the anlount of work done by the parser, we report the size of the chart.
The mnnl)er of active and immrive edges that enter the chart is given tbr the exhaustive search, not cored;lug those hypothetical edges theft are replaced or rejected because there is an alternative edge with higher t)robat)ility 4.
For t)runed search, we give |:tie percentage of edges required.
5.3 Fixed
Beam For our experiments, we define the beam by a maximunl number of edges per span.
Beams for active and inactive edges are set separately.
The Imams run from 2 to 12, and we test all 2Here, we use proper prefixes, i.e., all prefixes not including the last element.
aAs an example, PP-TMP=3 is replaced 173, PP.
4The size of the chart is corot)arable to the "number of edges popped" as given in (Chanfiak et al., 1998).
114 i 78 77 (D 8 7o cJ~ 75 (1) 74 z$ 73 72 71 79 Results with Original and Parent Encoding A ctive: 8 / ma¢.:l'~v°", "~I ;t(:l ix'(" (i /j j~ activ(',: 3 C " ' ';" F llldCt 1V( 12 active: 9 inactive,: 2 active: 3 / 1.0 1.2 ina(:tiv(',: 6 ilmctive: 8 a(:l.ive: d . a('tivo,: 7 I I 1 \[ \] i I I i -\] .d 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.d 2.6 2.8 3.0 % (:hart; size Figure 1: \]!}xt)erimental results tbr increJnelfl;al parsing and t)rmfing.
The figm:e shows the percentage of edges relative to (',xhaustiv(; s(;ar(:h mid l;h(', F-s(:()re a(:hieved with this chart size.
Exhaustive search yiehled 71.21% fin" th(; original en(:o(ting and 7!).28% for the I)arent (m(:o(ting.
l/.c, sull;s in the grey ar(;as are equiwflent with a (:()nli(l('n(:('~ (tegr(',e of (~ =: 0.99. 12\] comlfi\]~ati(ms of the, s(~ lmmus for ac:i;ivc and illactiw~ edges, l~ach setting results in a lm.ri;ic ulm" average size of l;he chart and an F-score, which arc tel)erred ill (;he following se(:l;ioll.
5.4 Experimental
Results The results of our 121 tes(; Hills with (tifl'erent settings for active and in;u:tivc \])(~a.ms m'e given in figure 1.
The (tittgranl shows ch~trt sizes vs.
labeled F-scores.
It sorts char|; sizes across dif ferent sel;l;ings of the beams.
If several beam sett;ings result in equiwdenfi chart sizes, the diagram cent;tins the one yielding th(', highes|, FSCOI'(L The 111~ill tinding is thai: we can r('xlu(:e the size of the chart to l)el;ween 1% and 3% of the size required fi)r exhaustive s(,ar(:h without affecting the results.
Only very small 1)cams d(;grad(' t)ertbrmance 5.
The eiti;ct occurs for both models despite the simple ranking formub~.
This significantly reduces memory r(,quirements '~Givc, n the' amount of test data (26,322 non-terminal nod(!s), results within a rang(' of around 0.7% arc cquival(mt with a (:onfidcnc(; degr(',(, of (~ = 99%.
(given as size of the chart) and increases l)m'sing qmed.
i1 t Exhaustive search yields an I-Score of 71.21 % when using the original Petal %'eel)ank cn(:odh~g.
()nly around 1% the edges are re(tuir('.d to yield e.(tuiwdcnt resul(;s with incrcm(,.ntal processing and printing after each word is added to the chart;.
This result is, among other settings, obtained by a tixcd beam of 2 for inactive edges and 3 tin" active e(lges ri 1,br the parmtt encoding, exhaustive search yields an l,-Scorc of 79.28%.
Only 1)etween 2 mM 3% of the edges are required to yMd an equiwflcnt result with incremental t)l'OCcSSillg and pruning.
As an cXmnl)le, the point at size = 3.0% F-score = 79.1% is generated by the beam setting of 12 for imml;ive and 9 tbr active edges.
The parent encoding yields around 8% higher F-scores but it also imposes a higher absolute and relative memory load on t;he process.
The higher (hw'ee of par~dlelism in l;he inactive (;Using variable Imams, wc would nccd \].95% of the \[:hart entries 1;o achieve an (KlllivalenI; F-scor(x 115 chart stems from the parent hytmthesis in each node.
In terms of pure node categories, the average number of parallel nodes at this point is 3.5 7 . Exhaustive search for the base encoding needs in average 140,000 edges per sentence, tbr tile parent encoding 200,000 edges; equivalent results for the base encoding can be achieved with around 1% of these edges, equivalent results tbr the parent encoding need between 2 and 3%.
The lower mmlber of edges significantly increases parsing speed.
Using exhaustive search tbr the base model, the parser processes 3.0 tokens per second (measured on a Pentium III 500; no serious efforts of optimization have gone into the parser).
With a chart size of 1%, speed is 630 tokens/second.
This is a factor of 210 without decreasing accuracy.
Sl)eed for the parent model is 0.5 tokens/second (exhaustive) and 111 tokens/seconds (3.0% chart size), yielding an improvement by factor 220.
6 Related
Work Probably mostly related to the work reported here are (Charniak et al., 1998) and (Roark and Johnson, 1999).
Both report on significantly improved parsing efl:iciency by selecting only subset of edges tbr processing.
There are three main differences to our at)t)roach.
One is that they use a ranking fbr best-first search while we immediately prune hypotheses.
They need to store a large number edges because it is not known in advance how maw of the edges will be used until a parse is found.
Tile second difference is that we proceed strictly incrementally without look-ahead.
(Chanfiak et al., 1998) use a non-incremental procedure, (Roark and Johnson, 1999) use a look-ahead of one word.
Thirdly, we use a much simpler ranking tbnnula.
Additionally, (Chanfiak et al., 1998) and (Roark and Johnson, 1999) do not use the original Penntree encoding tbr the context-fl'ee structures.
Betbre training and parsing, they change/remove some of the productions and introduce new part-of-speech tags tbr auxiliaries.
The exact effect of these modifications is unknown, and it is unclear if these affect compa7For the active chart, lmralellism cannot be given for different nodes types since active edges are introduced fbr right-hand side prefixes, collapsing all possible lefthand sides.
rability to our results.
Tile heavy restrictions in our method (immediate pruning, no look-ahead, very simple ranking formula) have consequences on the accuracy.
Using right context and sorting instead of pruning yields roughly 2% higher results (compared to our base encodingS).
But our work shows that even with these massive restrictions, the chart size can be reduced to 1% without a decrease in accuracy when compared to exhaustive search.
7 Conclusions
A central challenge in computational psycholinguistics is to explaiu how it is that people are so accurate and robust in processing language.
Given the substantial psycholinguistic evidence tbr statistical cognitive mechanisms, our objective in this paper was to assess the plausibility of using wide-coverage probabilistic parsers to model lmman linguistic performance.
In particular, we set out to investigate the effects of imposing incremental processing and significant memory limitations on such parsers.
The central finding of our experiments is that incremental parsing with massive (97% 99%) pruning of the search space does not impair the accuracy of stochastic context-free parsers.
This basic finding was rotmst across different settings of the beams and tbr the original Penn Treebank encoding as well as the parent encoding.
We did however, observe significantly reduced memory and time requirements when using combined active/inactive edge filtering.
To our knowledge, this is the first investigation on tree-bank grammars that systematically varies the beam tbr pruning.
Our ainl in this paper is not to challenge state-of-the-art parsing accuracy results.
For our experiments we used a purely context-ti'ee stochastic parser combined with a very simple pruning scheme based on simple "unigram" probabilities, and no use of right context.
We do, however suggest that our result should apply to richer, more sophistacted probabilistic SComparison of results is not straight-forward since (Roark and Johnson, 1999) report accuracies only tbr those sentences for which a parse tree was generated (between 93 and 98% of the sentences), while our parser (except for very small Imams) generates parses for virtually all sentences, hence we report; accuracies for all sentences.
116 models, e.g. when adding word st~tistics to the model (Charni~d¢, 1997).
We thereibre conclude theft wide-covcr~ge, prol)~fl)ilistic pnrsers do not suffer impaired a('curacy when subject to strict cognii;iv(~ meXnOl'y limitntions mM incremental processing.
Fm'thermore, parse times are sut)stm~ti~fily reduced.
This sltggt',sts that it; m~y lie fruit;tiff to tlur,sllC the use of these models within ¢',onlt)utational l)sycholinguistics, where it: is necessary to explain not Olfly the relatively r~tr(; 'pathologies' of the hmmm parser, but also its mor(; fl'e(tuently ol)scrved ~u:(:ur~my m~(1 rol)llSiilless.

