Chart-Based Transfer Rule Application in Machine Translation Adam Meyers New York University meyers@cs.nyu.edu Michiko Kosaka Monlnouth University kosaka@monmouth.edu Ralph GrishInan New York University grishman@cs.nyu.edu Abstract 35"ansfer-based Machine Translation systems require a procedure for choosing the set; of transfer rules for generating a target language translation from a given source language sentence.
In an MT system with many comI)eting transfer rules, choosing t;he best, set of transfer rules for translation may involve the evaluation of an explosive number of competing wets.
We propose a sohltion t;o this problem l)ased on current bestfirst chart parsing algorithms.
1 Introduction
ri~'ansfer-based Machine 'Kanslation systenls require a procedure for choosing the set of transtier rules for generating a target language I;ranslation from a given source language sentence.
This procedure is trivial tbr a system if, given a (:ontext, one transtb.r rule.
can l)e selected un~mfl)iguously.
O|;herwise, choosing the besl; set; of transfer rules may involve the.
evaluation of mmmrous competing sets.
In fact, the number of l)ossible transfer rule combinations increases exponentially with the length of the source, language sentence,.
This situation mirrors the t)roblem of choosing productions in a nondeterministic parser, in this paI)er, we descril)e a system for choosing transfer rules, based on statistical chart parsing (Bol)row, 1990; Chitrao and Grishman, 1990; Caraballo and Charniak, 1997; Charniak et al., 1998).
In our Machine %'anslation system, transfer rules are generated automatically from parsed parallel text along the lines of (Matsulnoto el; al,, 1993; Meyers et al., 1996; Meyers et al., 1998b).
Our system tends to acquire a large nmnber of transt~r rules, due lnainly to 3,1ternative ways of translating the same sequences of words, non-literal translations in parallel text and parsing e, rrors.
It is therefore crucial that our system choose the best set of rules efficiently.
While the technique discussed he.re obviously applies to similar such systems, it could also apply to hand-coded systems in which each word or group of words is related to more than one transfer rule.
D)r example, both Multra (Hein, 1996) and the Eurotra system described in (Way el; al., 1997) require components for deciding which combination of transtbr rules to use.
The proi).osed technique may 1)e used with syst;ems like these, t)rovided that all transfer rules are assigned initial scores rating thcqr at)propriateness for translation.
These al)t)rol)riateness ratings couhl be dependent or independent of context.
2 Previous
Work The MT literature deserib(;s several techniques tbr deriving the appropriate translation.
Statistical systems l;hal; do not incorporate linguistic analysis (Brown el: al., 1993) typically choose the most likely translation based on a statistical mode.l, i.e.., translation probability determines the translation.
(Hein, 1996) reports a set; of (hand-coded) fea|;llre structure based prefi~rence rules to choose among alternatives in Mu\]tra.
There is some discussion about adding some transtbr rules automatically acquired flom corpora to Multra?
Assuming that they overgenerate rules (as we did), a system like the one we propose should 1)e beneficial.
In (Way et al., 1997), many ditDrent criteria are used to dloose trmlsi~;r rules to execute including: pretbrmlces for specific rules over general ones, and comt)lex rule nol, ation that insures that tb.w rules can 21)ply to the same set, of words.
The Pangloss Mark III system (Nirenburg ~This translatioll procedm'e would probably complemenI~ not; replace exist, ing procedures in these systelns.
2http ://stp.
ling. uu.
se/~corpora/plug/report s / ansk_last/ is a report on this 1)reject; for Multra.
537 and Frederking, 1995) uses a chart-walk algorithm to combine the results of three MT engines: an example-based engine, a knowledgebased engine, and a lexical-transfer engine.
Each engine contributes its best edges and tile chart-walk algorithm uses dynamic programruing to find the combination of edges with the best overall score that covers the input string.
Scores of edges are normalized so that the scores fi'om the different engines are comparable and weighted to favor engines which tend to produce better results.
Pangloss's algorithm combines whole MT systems.
In contrast, our algorithm combines output of individual transfer rules within a single MT system.
Also, we use a bestfirst search that incorporates a probabilisticbased figure of merit, whereas Pangloss uses an empirically based weighting scheme and what appears to be a top-down search.
Best-first probabilistic chart parsers (Bobrow, 1990; Chitrao and Grishman, 1990; Caraballo and Charniak, 1997; Charniak et al., 1998) strive to find the best parse, without exhaustively trying all possible productions.
A probabilistic figure of merit (Caraballo and Charniak, 1997; Charniak et al., 1998) is devised for ranking edges.
The highest ranking edges are pursued first and the parser halts after it produces a complete parse.
We propose an algorithm for choosing and applying transthr rules based on probability.
Each final translation is derived from a specific set of transfer rules.
If the procedure immediately selected these transfer rules and applied them in tile correct order, we would arrive at tile final translation while creating the minimum number of edges.
Our procedure uses about 4 tinms this minimum number of edges.
With respect to chart parsing, (Charniak et al., 1998) report that their parser can achieve good results while producing about three times tile mininmm number of edges required to produce the final parse.
3 Test
Data We conducted two experiments.
For experiment1, we parsed a sentence-aligned pair of Spanish and English corpora, each containing 1155 sentences of Microsoft Excel Help Text.
These pairs of parsed sentences were divided into distinct training and test sets, ninety percent for training and ten percent fbr test.
The training Source Tree Target Tree D = volvcr D' = recalculate s,,I,J A = Excel E = calcular Obj~en A' = Excel I C' = workbook B' = values / C = libro k, B =valores \ae F = trabajo Excel vuelve a calcular Excel recalculates valores en libro de trabajo values iu workbook Figure 1: Spanish and English Iegularized Parse 2¥ees set was used to acquire transfer rules (Meyers et al., 1998b) which were then used to translate tile sentences in tile test set.
This paper focuses on our technique for applying these transfer rules in order to translate the test sentences.
The test and training sets in experiment1 were rotated, assigning a different tenth of the sentences to the test set in each rotation.
In this ww we tested tile program on the entire corpus.
Only one test set (one tenth of the corpus) was used for tuning the system (luring development.
~:ansfer rules, 11.09 on average, were acquired t'rom each training set and used for translation of the corresponding test set.
For Experiment 2, we parsed 2617 pairs of aligned sentences and used the same rotation procedure for dividing test and training corpora.
The Experiment 2 corpus included the experinlentl corpus.
An average of 2191 transfer rules were acquired from a given set of Experinmnt 2 training sentences.
Experimentl is orchestrated in a carefld manner that may not be practical for extremely large corpora, and Experiment 2 shows how the program performs if we scale up and elilniuate some of the fine-tuning.
Apart from corpus size, there are two main difference between the two experiments: (1) the experimentl corpus was aligned completely by hand, whereas the Experiment 2 corpus was aligned automatically using the system described ill (Meyers et al., 1998a); and (2) the parsers were tuned to the experimentl sentences, but not the Experiment 2 sentences (that did not overlap with experinmntl).
538 1) A = Excel 2) B =valores C = libro v A' = Excel B' = values.~) r C' = workbook F = trabajo D = volvcr S.IJ.i~ 4) 1 E = ealcular O b.
\]~en l 2 3 1)' = recalculate 1 2 3 Figure 2: A S('t of %-ansfer Rules 4 Parses and Transfer Rules Figure 1 is a pair of "regularized" parses t br a corresi)onding pair of Spanish and Fmglish sentences fi'om Microsoft Excel hell) text.
These at'(; F-structure-like dependency analyses of sentences that represent 1)redicate argument structure.
This representation serves to neutralize some ditfbrences between related sentence tyt)es, e.g., the regularized parse of related active and t)a,~sive senten(:es are identical, except tbr the {i'.ature value pair {Mood, Passive}.
Nodes (wflues) are labeled with head words and arcs (features) are labeled with gramma~;ical thnetions (subject, object), 1)repositions (in) and subordinate conjunctions (beNre).
a. For demonstration purposes, the source tree in Figure 1 is the input to our translation system and the target tree is the outl)ut.
The t;ransfer rules in Figure 2 can be used to convert the intmt; tree into the out1)at tree.
These transtbr rules are pairs of corresponding rooted substructures, where a substructure (Matsumoto et al., 1993) is a connected set of arcs and nodes.
A rule aMorphologieal features and their values (GramNumber: plural) are also represented as ares and nodes.
consists of o, ither a pair of "open" substructures (rule 4) or a pair of "closed" substructures (rules 1, 2 and 3).
Closed substructures consist of single nodes (A,A',B,B',C') or subtrees (the left hand side of rule 3).
Open substructures contain one or more open arcs, arcs without heads (both sul)structures in rule 4).
5 Simplified
Translation with Tree-based Transfer Rules The rules in Figure 2 could combine by filling in the open arcs in rule 4 with the roots of the substructures in rules 1, 2 and 3.
The result would be a closed edge which maps the left; tree in l,'igure, 1 into the right tree.
Just as edges of a chart parser are based on the context free rules used by the chart parser, edges of our translation system are, based on these trans~L'r rules.
Initial edges are identical to transtb, r rules.
Other edges result from combining one closed edge with one open edge.
Figure 3 lists the sequence of edges which wouhl result from combining the initial edges based (m Rules 1-4 to replicate, the trees in Figure 1.
The translation proceeds by incrementally matching the left hand sides of Rules 1-4 with the intmt tree (and insuring that the tree is completely covered by these rules).
The right-hand sides of these comt)atil)le rules are also (:ombined t;o 1)reduce the translal;iolL This is an idealized view of our system in which each node in the input tree matches the left;hand side of exactly one transfer rule: there is no ambiguity and no combinatorial explosion.
The reality is that more than one transfer rules may be activated tbr each node, as suggested in Figure 4.
4 If
each of the six nodes of the source tree corresponded to five transfer rules, there are 56 = 15625 possible combinations of rules to consider.
To produce tlm output in Figure 3, a minimum of seven edges would be required: four initial edges derived ti'om the original transfer rules plus three additional edges representing the combination of edges (steps 2, 3 and 4 in Figure 3).
The speed of our system is measured by the number of actual edges divided by this minimuln.
4The third example listed would actually involve two trm~sfer rules, one translating "volver" to "ret)cat" and the second translating "calcular" to "calculal;e".
539 1) 2) D = volver Su~ 1 E = calcular Obj~n 2 3 D = volver A = Excel E = calcular Obj~n 2 3 v v D' = recalculate I 2 3 D' = recalculate A' = Excel 2 3 3) D = volver A = Excel E = caleular B = valores 3 D' = recalculate A' = Excel / 3 g' = values 4) D = volver A = Excel E = calcular Ob/~n B = vaiores C = libro de F = trabajo v D' = recalculate A' = Excel \ C' = workbook B' = values Figure 3: An Idealized Translation Procedure 6 Best First Translation Procedure The following is an outline of our best first search procedure for finding a single translation: 1.
For each node N, find TN, the set of compatible transfer rules 2.
Create initial edges for all TN 3.
Repeat until a "finished" edge is tbund or an edge limit is reached: (a) Find the highest scoring edge E (b) If complete, combine E with compatible incoml)lete edges (c) If incomplete, combine E with compatible complete edges (d) Incomplete edge + complete edge = new edge The procedure creates one initial edge for each matching transfer rule in the database 5 and puts these edges in a '~The left-hand side of a matching transfer rule is compatible with a substructure in the input source tree.
540 D' = recalculate D = velvet 1 2 3 /% Sub, i / ~ a )'!
= calculate / \ / E = \'4.
'+" 3 again D = repeat Sabj ~bj 1 E = calculation Figure 4: Multiple \[lYansfer Rules for Each Substructm:e queue prioritized by score.
The procedure iteratively combines the best s(:oring edge with some other comt)al;ilfle edge to t)roduce a new edge.
and inserts the new edge in the queu('..
The score for each new edge is a function of the scores of the edges used to produce it:.
The process contimms m~til either an edge limit is reache(l (the system looks like it; will take too long to terminate) or a complete edge is t)roduced whose left-hand side is the input tree: we (:all this edge a "finished edge".
We use the tbllowing technique for calculating the score tbr initial edges.
6 The
score tbr each initial edge E rooted at N, based on rule/~, is calculated as follows: 1.
SCO17.F=I(S) " " F,.c.,~(n) = ~'°.q'~D~(~a ~ ~t N~) Where the fl'equency (Freq) of a rule is the nmnber of times it matched an exmnple in the training corpus, during rule ~cquisition.
The denominator is the combined fl'equencies of all rules that match N.
aThis is somewhat det)cndent on the way these |;ransfer rules are derived.
Other systems would t)robably have to use some other scoring system.
Ezperiment 1:1155 sentences Norm No Norm Total Translations Over Edge Limit Actual Edges Miniature Edges Edge Ratio Accuracy 1153 2 93,719 22,125 3.3 70.9 1127 28 579,278 20,125 1.4.8 70.9 Ezpcriment 2:2617 sentences Norm No Norm Total Translations Over Edge Limit Actual Edges Minimum Edges Edge Ratio A(:curacy 2610 7 262,172 48,570 4.0 62.6 2544 73 1,398,796 42,770 15.5 61.5 Figure 5: Result:s 2, S s ) = s,o,.(;.l ( S ) No,.,,,, Where the Norm (normalization) t~ctor is equal to the highest SCORE1 for any rule matching N.
Since the log.2 of probabilities are necessarily negative, this has the effect of setting the E of each of the most t)rol)able initial edges to zero.
The scores tbr non-initial edges are calculated by ad(ling u I) the scores of the initial e(tges of which they are comt)osed.
7 Without
any normMization (Score(S) = SCORE1 (,9)), small trees are favored over large trees.
This slows down the process of finding the final result.
The normalization we use insures that the most probable set; of transihr rules are considered early on.
7 Results
Figure 5 gives our results for both experiments 1 and 2, both with normalization (Norm) and without (No Norm).
"Total Translations" refer to the number of sen|;ences which were translated successfully 1)y the system and "Over Edge Limit" refers to the numl)er of sentences which caused the system to exceed the edge limit, i.e., once the system produces over 10,000 edges, trm~slation failure is assmned.
The system cur7Scoring for special cases is not; included in this paper.
These cases include rules for conjunctions and rules ibr words that do not match any transfer rules in a given context (we currently leave the word untranslated).
541 rently will only fail to produce some translation for any input if the edge limit is exceeded.
"Actual Edges" reibrs to the total number of edges used tbr attempting to translate every sentence in the corpus.
"Minimum Edges" refer to the total minimum number of edges required for successful translations.
The "Edge Ratio" is a ratio between: (1) "Total Edges" less the mnnber of edges used in failed translations; and (2) The "Minimum Edges".
This ratio, in coml)ination with, the number of "Over Edge Limit" measures the efficiency of a given system.
"Accuracy" is an assessment of translation quality which we will discuss in the next section.
Normalization caused significant speed-up for both experiments.
If you compare the total number of edges used with and without normalization, speed-up is a factor of 6.2 for Experiment I and 5.3 for Experiment 2.
If you compare actual edge ratios, speed-up is a factor of 4:.5 tbr Experiment 1 and 3.9 tbr Experiment 2.
In addition, the number of failed parses went down by a fhctor of 10 for both experiments.
As should be expected, accuracy was virtually the same with and without normalization, although normalization <lid cause a slight improvement.
Normalization should produce the essentially the same result in less time.
These results suggest that we can probably count on a speed-up of at least 4 and a signif icant decline in failed parses by using normMization.
The ditferences in performance on the two corpora are most likely due to the degree of hand-tuning for Experiment 1.
7.1 Our
Accuracy Measure "Accuracy" in Figure 5 is the average of the tbllowing score for each translated sentence: ITNYu ~ TMSI 1/2 x (ITNYuI + ITMsl) TNZU is the set of words in NYU's translation and TMS is the set of words in the original Microsoft translation.
If TNYU = "A B C D E" and TMS = "A B C F", then the intersection set "A B C" is length 3 (the numerator) and the average length of TNZU and TMS is 4 1/2 (the denominator).
The accuracy score equals 3 + 4 1/2 = 2/3.
This is a Dice coefficient comparison of our translation with the original.
It is an inexpensive nmthod of measuring the pertbrmance of a new version of our system, hnprovements in the average accuracy score for our san> ple set; of sentences usually reflect an improvement in overall translation quality.
While it is significant that the accuracy scores in Figure 5 did not go down when we normalized the scores, the slight improvement in accuracy should not be given nmch weight.
Our accuracy score is flawed in that it cannot account for the following facts: (1) good paraphrases are perfectly acceptable; (2) some diflbrences in word selection are more significant than others; and (3) errors in syntax are not directly accounted tbr.
NYU's system translates the Spanish sentence "1.
Selection la celda en la que desea introducir una rethrencia" as "1.
select the cell that you want to enter a reference in".
Microsoft translates this sentence as "1.
Select the cell in which you want; to enter the reference".
Our system gives NYU's translation an accuracy score of .75 due to the degree of overlap with Microsoft's translation.
A truman reviewer wouhl probably rate NYU's translation as completely acceptable.
In contrast, NYU's system produced the following unacceptable translation which also received a score of .75: the Spanish sentence "Elija la funcidn que desea pegar en la f6rmula en el cuadro de di~logo Asistente para flmciones" is translated as " "Choose the flmction that wants to paste Function Wizard in the formula in the dialog box", in contr,~st with Microsoft's translation "Choose the flmction you want to paste into the tbrmula fl'om the Function Wizard dialog box".
In fact, some good translations will get worse scores than some bad ones, e.g., an acceptable one word translation can even get a score of 0, e.g.,"SUPR" was translated as "DEL" by Microsoft and as "Delete" by NYU.
Nevertheless, by averaging this accuracy score over many examples, it has proved a valuable measure for comparing different versions of a particular system: better systems get better results.
Similarly, after tweaking the system, a better translation of a particular sentence will usually yield a better score.
8 Future
Work Fnture work should address two limitations of our current system: (1) Bad parses yield bad transihr rules; and (2) sparse data limits the size of our transfer rule database and our options for 542 applying transfer rules selectively.
To nttack the "bad parse" problem, we are eonsideriug using our MT system with less-detailed parsers, since these parsers typically produce less error-prone output.
We will have to conduct exl)erimcnts to determine the minimum level of detM1 that is needed, a Previous to the work reported in this paper, we ran our MT system on bilinguM corpora in which the sentences were Migned manuMly.
The cost of manuM aligmnent limited the size of the corpora we could use.
A lot of our recent MT research has bo.en tbcused on solving this sparse data prol)lem through our develoi)ment of a sentence alignment progrmn (Meyers et al., 1998a).
We now have 300,000 automaticMly aligned sentences in the Microsoft help text domain tbr future experiineni;s.
In addition to provi(ting us with many more transfer rules, this shouhl Mlow us to colh'.ct transfer rule co-occurrence information which we c~m then use to apply tr;mstbr rules more effectively, perhaps improving transb~tion quality.
In a preliminary experime, nt ahmg these lines using the Experiment 1.
tort)us, co-occurrence information had no noticeable ef feet.
However, we are hot)eflfl that flltm'e ext)eriments with 300,000 Migned sentences (300 tinies as nnlch data) will 1)e more successful.
SOne could set u 1) a contimmm from detailed parsers like Proteus down to shallow verb-group/noun-grouI) recognizers, with the Penn treetmnk based parsers lying somewhere in the middle.
As one travels down t, he eonLinlmIn t;o t;he lower detail parsers, tim error rate naturally decreases.

