Construction of a Hierarchical \]¥anslation Memory S.
Vogel, H.
Ney Lehrstuhl flit Intbrmatik VI, Computer Science Department 11~7~111 Aach(',n University of T(~chnology 1)-52056 Aachen, Gerinm~y Elnaih vogel@informatik, rwth-aachen, de Abstract _q}:anslation memories are t)ronfising devi('es for artt;omati(translation.
Their main weakuess, however, is poor coverage, on llllSeell {;ex|;.
\]ill this t)at)er, l;he use of a hierarchical l;ranslation memory, (:onsisting of a ('as(:ade of finite si;~d;e transducers, is t)rot)os(;d.
A mmfl)er of tr~nsdu(:e, rs is al)l)\]ied to (;onverl; s(;ni;enee 1)airs fl:om a t)ilingual cortms into translation patterns, which are then used as a translation me, mory.
Pr(;liminary results on the (\]erman English V ERBMOIIIL ('orl)us a,re given.
1 Introduction
In reeenl; years, exa,int)le-1)ased t;l"ansl~l;i<)l~ has been 1)rol)osed as an efli<:ient ~n(;t;llo<l for autom~d;i(: translation (Sal;o and Nag;to, 1990; Kitan(), 1993; Brown, \]99(i).
'lli'anslations are sl;()l;ed ill a trallslai;i()ll llle.lllory tloll(t llso, d t;o coi1SI;YllCI; trauslations for new sealten(:e.s.
In its sin> 1)lest version, examl)le-1)ased translation boils down to llSillg a (tat;fl)ase of SOllrce sell(;ell(;es with their l;rmlslations.
For many translat;ion tasks, esl)eeially in coml)ul;er assisl;cd |;ranslation, this at)l)roa(:h works with greal; success.
For flflly aul;onlat;i(" l;ranslal;ion the main t)rot) \]em is t)oor COVel'a~e oi1 lleW data.
To overcolIle this weakness, it hierar(:hi(:al translation lllelnory is prot)osed.
Al)plying a cascade of tinite sti%te |;ra, ils(hl('ers~ a~ SOllrce Selltellce is {;ralislaW, d into the tin:get language.
2 The
Transducers 2.1 Overview A translat;ion lnemory is siml)ly a eolle(:|;ion of source-l;arge3; string i)airs.
As a tirst Stel) ~ these translation examt)les (:all be (:onverted inl;o translation 1)atl;(.q:ns t)y lilt;reducing category \]abels, e.g. tbr prol)er nmnes or numbers.
3.'0 make the translation patterns even more useful, not only single words but comph;x phrases can be replace.d by category labels.
Which phrases t;o select for categorization depends on the aplflication, l,br example, the corpus lls0.d for this si;udy coal;alas many time and date expressions.
Therefore, a specialized |;ransduce, r was constructed to recognize and translal;e such e, xl)ressions.
Each transducer is a se~ of quadrut)les of the tbrm: label # source pal;t;ern # l;arget; t)atl;ern # score, Som'ce l)al;terns and target patterns may contain category labels.
We call su(:h l)atterns ~(:ompomldL ~.l.~:ansdueea's working only on the word level are (:ailed 'simple'.
\]if a la:ansdll(:e,r coal;alas recursive p:tl;terns, e.g.
\])ATE # \])NPE lind \])ATE # I)AS£I'~ and \])ATI'3 # -3.0, it; has |;o be.
apl)lied re.cursively t;o t;he input;.
The scores a,t|;a(:hed to the translation t)at terns can be viewed ns translation scores.
They are llse, d to bi~ts towards 1;he selection of lollg(;r part;eras and towards lliore likely translations in I;hose cases where several targol; patterns are associated with ()lie SOllrce t)a,l;i;ern.
'.l'he transducers can be applied in 1)oth directions, i.e. for a given language pair, each language can be viewed as source language.
Thcrel)y, bilingual labeling is possilfle.
This can l)e applied to convert a bilingual corlms into a selection of translation l)atterns which are.
formulated in terms of words and ('ategory lal)els.
2.2 Construction
of the Transducers The transducers should t)e selected in such a way am to minimize l;he lle, ed tbr recursive apt)li(:al;ion in order l;o lint)rove efficiency.
Theretbre, |;11(' l)atl;erns to search tbr are l)artitioned to forln a ('as(:ade of t;ransducers.
Sonic trans(lucers analys(,' l)arts of the senten(:e and rel)la(:e it 1131 by a category label, which is then used at a later step by another transducer.
The labeling of the days of the week or the names of the months is a prerequisite to apply more complex patterns for date expressions.
The transducers currently used are listed in Table 1.
'Fable 1: List of transducers.
1. names (persons, towns, places, events, etc) 2.
spelling (e.g.
'D A double L') 3.
numbers (ordinal, cardinal, fractions, etc) 4.
time and date expressions 5.
parts of speech (tbr certain word classes) 6.
grammar (noun phrases, verb phrases) Some transducers are general in scope, e.g. the transducers for numbers, part of speech tags and grammar.
Others are costumized towards the domain tbr which the translation system is developed.
In tile VERBMOBIL corpus, which is used for the experiments, time and date expressions are very prominent.
To recognize these expressions, a small grammar has been developed and coded as finite state transducer.
Actually, two transducers are used.
On the first level, words are replaced by labels, like DAYOFWEEK = { Montag, Dienstag,...}.
On the second level, these labels are used to t'orm complex time and date expressions.
This second transducer works recursively, as simpler expressions are used to build more complex expressions.
Finally, a small grammar based on POS (part of speech) tags has been crafted mamlally.
The purpose of this grammar is to recognize simple noun phrases.
Extensions to handle the different word ordering in the verb phrases arc under development.
2.3 Scoring
The scores attached to the translation patterns can be viewed as a kind of translation scores.
In the current implementation a rather crude heuristic together with some manual tuning in the grammar transducer is applied.
The idea is to give preference to longer translation patterns as they take more context into account and encode word reordering in an explicit manner.
Thus, fbr simple and compound translation patterns the score is exponential to the length of the source pattern.
Tile scores are negative by convention: not translating a word gives zero cost, translating it gives a benefit, i.e. negative costs.
In future, scoring will be refined by using corpus statistics to assign probabilities to the translation patterns.
2.4 Bilingual
Labeling The sentence pairs ill the bilingual training corpus can be segmented into shorter segments with the help of an alignment progrmn (Och et al., 1999).
This collection of segments could be used directly as a translation memory.
However, to improve the coverage on unseen data, these segnmnts are labeled.
Applying the transducers as given in Table 1 transfbrms these segments into compound t)hrases.
The procedure is as follows: 1.
For each transducer taken from the complete cascade as given in Table 1 aplilY the transducer to both, the source and tlm target sentences of the bilingual training cortms.
2. Find those sentence pairs which contain equal number and types of category labels tbr both sentences.
3. For sentence pairs which do not match in mmflmr and type of the category labels keep the original sentence pair.
Table 2 shows examples of some translation patterns which resulted flom bilingual labeling.
3 Applying
the Transducers The working of the transducers is best described as tile construction of a translation graph.
That is to say, the sentence to be translated is viewed as a graph which is traversed fi'om left to right.
For each matching source pattern, as encoded in the transducers, a new edge is added to the graph.
The edge is labeled with the category label of the translation pattern.
The translation and the translation score are attached to the edge.
In this way a translation graph is constructed.
In those cases, where a source pattern has several translations, one edge tbr each translation is added to the graph.
Tim left right search on the graph is organized in such a way that all paths are traversed 1132 Table 2: Coml)ound translation t)atterns (CTP).
CTP ~ DATE_DAY ginge es wiedcr CTP ~ SURNAME am A1)i)~rat CTP ~ NP dauert DATE CTP @ nehmen PPER NP DATE @ DATE_DAY it is possible again :~ -4.6 ~/: this is SURNAME st)caking @ -3.3 NP takes DATE :~ -3.3 let PPER take NP DATE @ -4.6 in parallel and tile patterns sl;ored in the transducer are matched synchronously.
For each ~lo(te n and each edge e leading to n, all patterns in tile transducer starting with the label of e arc attached to n.
This gives a mmlber of hypotheses describing partially matching patterns.
Already started hypotheses are expanded with tile lal)el of the edge running ti'om the l)revious node to the current node.
This procedure is shown in l~'igul'e 1.
For a selection of t;rmmlation patterns from the siml)le, word-1)ased translation memory the hyt)otheses tbr 1)artially matching patterns generated during the left--right traversal are shown as well as the resulting new edges.
The result of applying all transducers is a graph where each path is a (partial) translation of the source sentence.
The 1)ath with the best overall score is used to construct the final translation.
For good result;s, not; only the scores from t;he transducers shoul(l 1)e used in selecting the best t)ath, but a language model of the target language should l)e inchlde(l.
1 llIIl # al, on, at the 9 Montag# Monday 17 waere es so moeglich # would that be possilflc 18 wic ist cs bel lhncn # how about you 19 wie waerc es # how al)out 20 wie wacrc cs denn # how about 21 wie waere es denn am Montag # how about Monday 22 wie wacrc es am Montag # Imw about Monday Figure 1: Ext)ansion of Pattern Hypotheses 3.1 Error Tolerant Match To improve tile coverage on unseen test data, it may be avantageous to allow tbr approximativc matching.
The idea is, to apply longer segments tbr syntactically better translations without loosing to much as far as tile content of the sentences is concerned.
We us(; weighted edit distance, i.e. each error (insertion, deletion, substitution) is assiciated with an individual score.
Thereby, the deletion or insertion of typical filler words can be allowed, whereas the deletion or insertion of content words is avoided.
3.2 Translation
on Word Lattices The approach described so far can be used for a tight integration of speech recognition and translation.
Speech recognition systems typically 1)ro(luce wor(l lattices which encode the most likely word sequences in an e.flicient lllallnet.
A direct translation on the lattice has, compared to transforming the lattice, into an nbest list;, translating each word sequence, mM selecting the overall best translation, a nulnber of advantages: • all the paths can be covered, whereas in an n-best approach typically only a small fraction of tile paths is considered; • partial translation hypotheses are reused; • acoustic scores can be taken into account when calculating an overall score for each translation hypothesis.
4 Experiments
and Results In this section, we will report on first expertments and results obtained with the cascaded transducer approach.
Experiments were pertbrmed on the VERBMOBIL corpus.
This corpus consists of spontaneously spoken dialogs in the appointment scheduling domain (Wahlster, 1993).
The vocabulary comprises 7 335 German 1133 words and 4382 English words.
A test corI)us of 147 sentences with a total of 1 968 words was used to test the coverage of tile transducers and to run preliminary translation experiments.
In Table 3 the sizes of the transducers are given.
Table 3: Number of translation t)atterns of tile transducers.
Transducer Patterns Nalne Spell Number Date POS Tags ~ralnnlar 442 60 342 334 671.4 124 4.1 Coverage In a first series of experiments, the coverage of the cascaded transducers was tested.
TILe sentences pairs Dora the training corpus were segmented into shorter segments.
This resulted in 43609 bilingual phrases running from 1 word up to 82 words in length.
The longest phrases were discarded as it is very unlikely that they will match other sentences.
Thus, for the experiments only 40000 sentence pairs were used, the longest sentences containing sixteen source words.
Starting fi'om those simple phrases, successively more transducers were applied 1lt) to the fllll cascade.
In Table 4 the coverage for each level is shown.
As expected, the coverage increases and nearly flfll coverage on the test sentences is reached.
In tile final step, the POS transducer and the grammer transducer are both applied.
The first cohnnn shows which transducers have been applied.
In each step, one additional transducer is applied tbr bilingual labeling and tbr translation.
Bilingual labeling reduces the number of distinct patterns in the translation memory, whereas the immber of compound patterns increases.
The last column shows the number of words in the test sentences not covered by the patterns ill tile translation nmmory.
As can be seen, the coverage increases which each step.
The large improvement in the final Table 4: Efl'ect of selected transducers oi1 coverage on test corpus.
%'ansdncers Patterns Colnnot pound covered NOlle Name + Spell + Number + Date + Gramnlar 40000 39624 39508 38669 36118 35519 1.259 1468 11181 14684 15682 273 254 249 238 215 9 step results froln applying tile POS-tag transducer whidl coveres a large part of the vocabulary.
4.2 Translation
First experiments have been performed to test tile approach tbr translation.
So far, no language model tbr the target language is applied to score the different translations.
For the sentence 'Samstag und Februar sind gut, aber der siebzehnte ware besser' the best t)ath through the resnlting translation graph gives a structure as shown in Figure 2.
IlL Table 5, some translation examples for test sentences not seen ill the training corpus arc given.
Table 5: Three translations generated t'rom the hierarchical translation memory.
Ich werde lnit dem Fhlgzeug kolnnmn.
I will come with the plane.
Ja, wunderbar.
Machen wir das so, und dann treflbn wir uns daim ill Hamburg.
Vielen Dank und auf WiederhSren.
Well, excellent.
Shall we fix this, and then we will meet then in Hanfl)urg.
Thank you very much goodbye.
Das kann ich nicht einrichten.
Ich habe eine Chance ab dreimldzwanzigsten Oktober.
Ist es da bei Ihnen m6glich?
It can I not arrange.
I have a chance froln twenty-third of October.
Is it as for you possible? 1134 I C_PHRASE the fourth would be better -7.4 ~DATE \] Saturday and February -4,2 DATE DATE Saturday February -0.6 -0.6 DAYWEEK Saturday -0.5 Samstag I MONTH February -0.5 Feb ruar 4 I DATE the fourth -4.1 ~ DATEDAY the fourth -4.0 are ood but -2 1 -0 1 ~a_ere ~A Figure 2: \[\[~'m~slation example 5 Sun'nnary and conclusions In this t)npcr a translation at)pronch 1)asexl on cascaded tin|re state l;ra,nsducers has l)een presen|ext.
A mm~l\] mm~l)er of simple l;rmlsdut'(;rs is handcrafted and then used to convert; n bilingual cortms in|;o a translation memory consisting of som:(:c l)al;tcrn target; i)a,l;l;(;rn p~tirs, which inchuh; category lnlmls.
Trmlslni;ion is then lmrformcd by applying l;he comtflel;e casca(le of l;rans(luce.rs.
First (;xl)e.rim(mts ha,v(; shown l;lm \])ot,cnl;i;J of this ai)l)ro~u:h for m~tchine l;ransla,tion.
Good coverag(~ on mlse,(m test data ('ould 1)e ol)l;aine(l.
The. main ditficulty in this nt)l)roach is to (tel|he a (:onsistenl; scoring s('heme thr the (litt'e,rent transdu(:('rs.
Especially, ~ good l)M~m('e t)(;tween the grammm: and th(', word-t)as(;d |,ransb> lion m('mory is n(',c(;ssary.
'Phis will t)e th(' main focus for futur(', work.
As Mrea(ty mentioned, ;~ l~tngmtge modal for th(; tnrget l~mguag(; has to bc integrated into t;h(, scoring of the translation hyl)othes(,s.
Fimflly, the l, rmmdu('er based al)t)roadl to translation will 1)e tested on word lattice.s as i)rodu(:ed by spee,(:h recognition systeans.
Acknowledgement. This work was partly SUl)t)orted l)y the German Fede.ral Ministry of E(tuc~ttion, S(:ie.n(:e, ll.es(;m:ch mM 3b.(:hnoh)gy under the.
Contract Nulnl)er 01 IV 701 Td (vl m vonu,).

