Estimation of Stochastic Attribute-Value Grammars using an Informative Sample Miles Osborne osborne~let.rug.nl Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, The Netherlands* Abstract We argue that some of the computational complexity associated with estimation of stochastic attributevalue grammars can be reduced by training upon an informative subset of the full training set.
Results using the parsed Wall Street Journal corpus show that in some circumstances, it is possible to obtain better estimation results using an informative sample than when training upon all the available material.
Further experimentation demonstrates that with unlexicalised models, a Gaussian prior can reduce overfitting.
However, when models are lexiealised and contain overlapping features, overfitting does not seem to be a problem, and a Gmlssian prior makes minimal difference to performance.
Our approach is applicable for situal;ions when there are an infeasibly large mnnber of parses in the training set, or else for when recovery of these parses fl'om a packed representation is itself comi)utationally expensive.
1 Introduction
Abney showed that attribute-value grammars cannot be modelled adequately using statistical techniques which assume that statistical dependencies are accidental (Ablmy, 1997).
Instead of using a model class that assumed independence, Abney suggested using Random Fields Models (RFMs) tbr attribute-value grmnmars.
RFMs deal with the graphical structure of a parse.
Because they do not make independence assumptions about the stochastic generation process that might have produced some parse, they are able to model correctly dependencies that exist within parses.
When estimating standardly-formulated RFMs, it is necessary to sum over all parses licensed by the grammar.
For many broad coverage natural language grammars, this might involve summing over an exponential number of parses.
This would make the task eomtmtationally intractable.
Almey, following the lead of Lafferty et al, suggested a Monte * Current address: osborne@eogsei.ed.ae.uk, University of Edinburgh, Division of Informaties, 2 Bueeleuch Place, EII8 9LW, Scotland.
Carlo simulation as a way of reducing the computational burden associated with RFM estimation (Lafferty et al., 1997).
However, Johnson ct al considered the form of sampling used in this sinmlation (Metropolis-Hastings) intractable (Johnson et M., 1999).
Instead, they proposed an Mternative strategy that redefined the estimation task.
It was argued that this redefinition made estimation eomtmtationMly simple enough that a Monte Carlo simulation was unnecessary.
They presented results obtained using a small unlexicalised model trained on a modest corlms.
Unfortunately, Johnson et al assumed it was possible to retrieve all parses licensed by a grmnmar when parsing a given training set.
For us, this was not the case.
In our experiments with a manually written broad coverage Definite Clause Grammar (DCG) (Briscoe and Carroll, 1996), we were only able to recover M1 parses for Wall Street.Journal sentences that were at most 13 tokens long within acceptable time and space bounds on comtmtation.
When we used an incremental Minilnum Description Length (MDL) based learner to extend the coverage of our mmmally written gralnular (froul roughly 6()~ to around 90% of the parsed Wall Street .Jouriml), the situation became worse.
Sentence ambiguity considerably increased.
We were then only able to recover all parses for Wall Street Journal sentences that were at most 6 tokens long (Osborne, 1999).
We can however, and usually in polynomial time, recover up to 30 parses for sentences up to 30 tokens long when we use a probabilistic unpacking mechanism (Carroll and Briscoe, 1992).
(Longer sentences than 30 tokens can be parsed, but the nmnber of parses we can recover for them drops off rapidly).
1 However, 30 is far less tlmn the maximum number l"vVe made an attempt to determine the maximum number of parses our grammar might assign to sentences.
On a 450MIIz Ultra Spare 80 with 2 G'b of real memory, with a limit of at most 1000 parses per sentence, and allowing no more than 100 CPU seconds per sentence, we found that sentence ambiguity increased exponentially with respect to sentence length.
Sentences with 30 tokens had an estimated average of 866 parses (standard deviation 290.4).
Without the limit of 1000 parses per sentence, it seems likely that this average would incrc, ase.
586 of parses per sentence o111' grammar mighl, assign to Wall Stl"ec't Journal sent;enees.
Any training set we have a(:eess to will therefore be l|eeessarily limite(l in size.
We therefore need an estimation strategy that takes seriously the issue of extracting the 1)esl, perrefinance fl'om a limited size training Met.
A limited size tra.ining sol; means one ereate(l l)y retrieving at most n t)arses per Ment(mee.
Although we (:annot recover all t)ossil)le i)arses~ we (lo }lave a choice as to which llarses estimation should 1)e based Ul)On.
Our ai)proach to the prol)lem of making IFM estimation feasible, ibr our highly amt)iguous I)CG is to seek ol\]|; an ivformativc samt)le and train ui)on that.
We (lo not redefine the estimation task in a non-sl;al~tlard w;~y, 1101' (lo we llSe a ~{o\]lte Carlo silnulation.
We (:all a salul)lc informative if it 1)oth leads to the select;ion of a 111ollol that does not mldertit or overfit, and also is typical of t'utm'e samples, l)esl)itc ()lie's intuitions, an infornmtive saml)le might be a prol)er subset of the fifll training set.
This means that estinlation using the int'ornmtiv(; sample might yield 1)etter results than estimation using all of the l;rainhlg Met;.
The ):(;st of this 1)aper is as tbllows, l,'irstly we introduce RFMs.
Then we show how they nlay be esl;imated and how an infbrmative saml)le might 1)e identified.
Nexl;, we give details of the, a(;tributevahle gramnlar we use, all(t show \]lOW we ~o at)otlt modelling it.
We then i)resent two sets of experimel)ts.
The first set is small scale, and art! de.signed to show the existent;e of ;m inti)rmative sample.
The second ski of CXl)erilll(;llI, S al'e larger in scale, an(1 build upon the COml)utational savil|gS we are al)le to achieve using a probabilistic Unl)acking strategy.
They show how large me(Ms (two orders of magnitude larger than those reported by Johnson ctal) can 1)e estimated using the l)arsed Wall Street .lourhal eort)us.
Overlitting is shown to take place.
They also show how this overfitting can be (partially) reduced by using a Gaussian prior.
Finally, we end with SOllle COllllllelltS Oil Ollr WOl.k. 2 Random Field Models Here we show how attribute-wflue grammars may be modelle(1 using RFMs.
Although our commentary is in terms of RFMs and grammars, it should t)e ol)vious that RFM technology can be applied to other estimation see.narios.
Let G be an attribute-value grammar, D the set of sentences within the string-set defined lly L(G) and ~ the union of the set of parses assigne(1 to each sentence in D by the gramnmr G.
A Random Field Model, M, consist of two coral)orients: a set of features, F and a set; of 'wei.qhts, A.
l?eatures are the basle building blocks of RFMs.
They enable the system designer to spccit)~ {;lie key asl)ects of what it; takes to ditferentiate one 1)arse from a11other parse.
Each feature is a t'lmetion from a 1)arse to an integer.
Her(.', the integer value associated with a feature is interpreted as the nmnber of times a feature 'matches' (is 'active') with a parse.
Note features should not be confllsed with features as found in feature-value t)undles (these will be called atl;ril)utes instead).
\]Peatures are usually manually selected by the sysl;ein designer.
The other component of a RFM, A, is a set of weights, hffornmlly, weights tell its how ti;atures are to be used when nlodellillg parses.
For exanlple, an active feature with a large weight might indicate that some parse had a higtl prolmlfility.
Each weight Ai is associated with a thatm'e fi.
Weights arc' real-valued nmnl)ers an(l ~:H'O autonmtically deternfined 113: an estimation process (for example using hnproved Iteratire Scaling (LaflL'rty et al., 1997)).
One of the nice l)roI)erties of Rl.i'Ms is that 1111o likelihood fiuw£ion of a RFM is strictly concave.
This means 1;hat there ~/t"e.
11o h)cal lllillillla~ and so wc can be, l)e sure that sealing will result in estinmtion of a 11.1,'54 that is glol)ally ot)timal.
The (unnormalised) total weight of a i)arse :c, '(J(:r), is a flulction of the.
k feaLures that are 'active' on a 1)arse: k .,/,(.) = ()).
(1) i=l The prol)ability of a parse, P(x I M), is simply the result of norm~dising the total weight associated with that parse: J'(:,, IM) = 12) z -(a) yGf~ The inl;erpretation of this I)robability depends upon the apt)lication of tile RFM.
Here, we use parse prol)abilities to rettect preferences for parses.
When using RFMs for parse selection, we sin> ply select the parse that ma.ximises ~/;(:1:).
In these circumstances, there is 11o need to nornlalise (compute Z).
Also, when comtmting,/~(:c) for comi)eting parses, there is no built-in bias towards shorter (or longer) derivations, and so no need to normalise with respect to deriw~tion length/ 2The reason there is no need to normalisc with respect to derivation length is that features can have positive o1" negative weights.
The weight of a parse will ttlcrcforc not always monotonically increase with respect to the re,tuber of active ti~atm'cs.
587 3 RFM Estimation and Selection of the Informative Sample We now sketch how RFMs may be estimated and then outline how we seek out an informa.tive smnple.
We use hnproved Iterative Scaling (IIS) to estimate RFMs.
In outline, the IIS algorithm is as follows: 1.
Start with a reference distribution H,, a set of features F and a set of weights A.
Let M be the RFM defined using F and A.
2. Initialise all weights to zero.
This makes tile initial model uniform.
3. Compute the expectation of each feature w.r.t R.
4. For each feature fi (a) Find a weight ~; that equates the expectation of fi w.r.t/?, and the expectation of fi w.r.t M.
(b) Ileplace the old value of ki with 21.
5. If the model has converged to/£, output M.
6. Otherwise, go to step 4 Tile key step here is 4a, computing the expectations • of features w.r.t the RFM.
This involves calculating the probability of a parse, which, as we saw fronl equation 2, requires a summation over all parses in ft.
We seek out an informative sample ~l (fh C ~) as follows: I.
Pick out from ~ a sample of size n.
2. Estimate a model using that smnple and evaluate it.
3. If the model just estimated shows signs of overfitting (with respect to an unseen held-out data set), halt and output the inodel.
4. Otherwise, increase n and go back to step 1.
Our approach is motivated by tile following (partially related) observations: • Because we use a non-Imrmnetric model class and select an instance of it in terlns of some sample (section 5 gives details), a stochastic complexity argument tells us that an overly simple model (resulting from a small sample) is likely to underfit.
Likewise, an overly complex model (resulting from a large sample) is likely to overfit.
An informative samI)le will therefore relate to a model that does not under or overfit.
• On average, an informative sample will be %ypical' of future samples.
For many reaMife situations, this set is likely to be small relative to the size of the full training set.
We incorporate the first observation through our search mechanism.
Because we start with small sampies and gradually increase their size, we remain within the donmin of etliciently recoverable samples.
The second observation is (largely) incorporated in the way we pick samples.
The experimental section of this paper goes into the relevant details.
Note our approach is heuristic: we cmmot afford to evahmte all 21~1 possible training sets.
The actual size of the informative sample fit will depend both tile Ill)On the model class used and the maximum sentence length we can de~,l with.
We would expect: richer, lexicalised models to exhibit overfitting with slnaller samples than would be the case with unlexicalised models.
We would expect the size of an informative sample to increase as the maxilnum sentence length increased.
There are similarities between our approach and with estimation using MDL (Rissanen, 1989).
However, our implementation does not explicitly attempt to minimise code lengths.
Also, there are similarities with importance sampling approaches to RFM estimation (such as (Chen and ll,osenfeld, 1999a)).
However, such attempts do not miifinfise under or overfitting.
4 The
Grammar The grammar we model with I/andom Fields, (called the Ta 9 Sequence Grammar (Briseoe and Carroll, 1996), or TSG for short) was developed with regard to coverage, and when compiled consists of 455 Definite Clause Grammar (DCG) rules.
It does not parse sequences of words directly, but instead assigns derivations to sequences of part-of-speech tags (using the CLAWS2 tagset.
The grammar is relatively shallow, (for exmnple, it does not fltlly analyse unbounded dependencies) but it does make an attelnpt to deal with coilunou constructions, such as dates or names, commonly found in corpora, but of little, theoretical interest.
Furthermore, it integrates into the syntax a text gramma.r, grouping utterances into units that reduce the overall ambiguity.
5 Modelling
the Grammar Modelling the TSG with respect to the parsed Wall Street .\]ournal consists of two steps: creation of a feature set and definition of the reference distribution.
Our feature set is created by parsing sentences in the training set (~br), and using earl, parse to illstantiate templates.
Each template defines a family of features.
At present, the templates we use are somewhat ad-hoc.
However, they are motivated by the observations that linguistically-stipulated units (DCG rules) are informative, trod that ninny DCG apl)lications in preferred parses can be predicted using lexical information.
588 AP/al:unimlieh.'d I A 1/aI) p i :unimpeded unimI)eded PP/t)I:by \[ P1/iml :by by N1/n:trafli: I trafl\]{: Figure 1: TSG Parse Fragumnt The first template creates features that count {;lie numl)er of tinms a.
DUG instantiationis i)resent within,2 1}arse.
a For examt}le, Sul)p}s~ we 1)arset the Wall Street Journal AP: 1 unimpeded 1}y t:ralic A parse tree generated by TSG nfight lie as shown in figure 1.
Here, to s:~ve on Sl}ace, wc have labdled each interior node in the parse tree with TSG rule names, and not attribut(;-valu(~ bun(lies.
Furthermore, we have mmota.t('xl each node with the lmad w(}rd of tim l}hrase in question.
Within ollr gl;aillmar, heads arc (usually) ext)lMtly market.
This 1110;/,118 W(~ do l\]ot \]l;~v~ to Ill&k(~ ;lily gllossos w}lcll identit\[ying the head of a.
local tree.
With head infoi'mtd;io\]b we are alo/e to lexicalise models.
\Ve haa;e suppressed taggillg information.
For {'.xamp\]e, a \]hature (h'Jin(;d using this t(;nlplat; might (:O1111t tho, nuinber ()f times th(! we saw: AP/at I A1/at/1)1 111 a 1)arse.
Such features r(~coi'd sore( 2 (if the context of the rule a.t}p\]i(:ation, in that rule al}t}Iication8 that differ ii1 terms of how attributes are bound will 1}e modelled by (litlhrent thatures.
Our se'ond total}late creates features that al'{'~ partially lexicalised.
I~br each lo:al tree (of depth one) that has a \]?P daughter, we create a feature that counts the lmmber of times that h)cal tree, de(:orated with the head-woM of the I'l', was seen in a.
parse. An cxmnple of such ;1 lexicMised feature would 1}e: A1/apt}l I PI)/til:l)y 3Note, all (}111" fo.al;/ll'es Slll)i)r(?ss ;tlly t!l'nlillals thgtl, al)i}em' in a h}caI 1,Fe(!.
Lexical informaI;ioll is in:luded when we decide to lexicalise features.
These featm'cs are designed to model PP attachments that can be resolved using the head of the PP.
The thh'd mid tinM template creates featuros that are again partiMly lexicalised.
This time, we create local trees of det}th one that are, decorated with the head word.
For example, here is one such feature: AP/al:mfimpeded I A1/appl Note the second and third templates result in features that overlap with features resulting fl'om at)i}\]icati(ms of the first template.
We create the reference distribution 1~ (an association of t)r}l}al)i\]ities with TSG parses of sentences, such that the t}robabilities reflect 1}a.rse i)references) using the following process: 1.
Extra;t some sami}le f~T (using the al)l)roach mentioned in sc(:tion 3).
2. For each sentence in tim sample, for each l)arse of that sent;encc', {:Olnl)ute the '(lista.ncc' between the TSG 1}mse and the WSJ refereuce parse.
\]1\] our at)t)roach, dista.nce is cM:lfla.tc(1 in tcl7111s of a weighted Slltll of crossing rates, recall and 1}recision.
Mininlising it maximises our definition of parse plausibility.
4 However, there is nothing inherently crucial about this decision.
Auy othc'r objective flmction (thaJ; can l)c ret)r(~sent('.(l as an CXl}Oncntial distribution) couh\] 1)e used instead.
3. Normalise the distan('es, such that for some,sentcn(:e, tim sum of tim distances of all rt~covO,l.'od ~\[?SG t)al"S(~S \]\['(/1" that soii|;(!ilCO, is a COllSt£tilt a.cross all sento.nces.
Nornmlising in this manner ensures that each sentence is cquil)robal}le 0"emcmber that \]{FM probabilities are in terms of I}a.rse lir'.fl~r'.nces, and not probability of oc{:llrrHIee ill 8}111~ (;orl)llS).
4. Map the norinalised distances into 1}robabilities.
If d(p) is the normalised {listance of TSG l/;}~l"Se p, then associate with parse 1) the refer(race probability given by the maximum likelihood estimator: rl(1,) (4) Our approach therefore gives t}artial cl'e(lit (a 11oilzero reference l)robability) to a.ll parses in ~z.
/2, is thcreibr(; not as discontimlous as the equivalent distrit)ution used by Johnson at al.
We therefl)re do not need to use simulated annea.ling o1' other numerically intensive techniques to cstiinate models.
4Ore' distanc(~ mo.l;ric is the same one used I}y llektom (ltektoen, 19.97) 589 6 Experiments Here we present two sets of experiments.
The first set demonstrate the existence of an informative sample.
It also shows some of the characteristics of three smnpling strategies.
The second set of experiments is larger in scale, and show RFMs (both lexicalised and unlexicalised) estimated using sentences up to 30 tokens long.
Also, the effects of a Gaussian prior are demonstrated as a way of (partially) dealing with overfitting.
6.1 Testing
the Various Sampling Strategies In order to see how various sizes of sample related to estimation accuracy and whether we could achieve similar levels of performm~ce without recovering all possible parses, we ran the following experiments.
We used a model consisting of features that were defined using all three templates.
We also threw away all features that occurred less than two times in the training set.
We randomly split; the Wall Street Journal into disjoint training, held-out and testing sets.
All sentences in the training and held-out sets were at most 14 tokens long.
Sentences ill the testtug set, were at most 30 tokens long.
There were 6626 sentences in the training set, 98 sentences in the held-out set and 441 sentences in tile testing set.
Sentences in the held-out set had on average 12.6 parses, whilst sentences in the testing-set had on average 60.6 parses per sentence.
The held-out set was used to decide which model performed best.
Actual performmme of the models should be judged with rest)ect to the testing set.
Evaluation was in terIns of exact match: tbr each sentence in the test set, we awarded ourselves a t)oint if the RFM ranked highest the same parse that was ranked highest using the reference probabilities.
When evahmting with respect to the held-out set, we recovered all parses for sentences in the held-out set.
When evaluating with respect to the testing-set, we recovered at most 100 parses per sentence.
For each run, we ran IIS for the same number of iterations (20).
In each case, we evaluated the RFM after each other iteration and recorded the best classification pertbrmance.
This step was designed to avoid overfitting distorting our results.
Figure 2 shows the results we obtained with possible ways of picking 'typical' samples.
The first column shows the maxinmm number of parses per sentences that we retrieved in each sample.
The second column shows the size of the sample (in parses).
The other cohmms give classification accuracy results (a percentage) with respect to the testing set.
In parentheses, we give performance with respect; to the held-out set.
The column marked Rand shows the performance Max parses Size 1 6626 2 12331 3 17026 5 24878 10 39581 100 119694 1000 246686 oo 267400 Rand SCFG Ref 25.2 (51.7) 23.3 (59.0) 23.4 (50.0) 37.9 (63.0) 40.4 (60.3) 40.4 (60.0) 43.2 (65.5) 43.7 (63.8) 43.7 (63.8) 43.7 (70.2) 45.8 (69.5) 45.8 (69.5) 47.4 (72.0) 47.0 (70.0) 46.9 (70.0) 45.0 (68.7) 45.0 (68.0) 45.0 (68.0) 44.4 (67.4) 43.0 (67.0) 43.0 (67.0) 43.0 (66.0) 43.0 (66.0) 43.0 (66.0) Figure 2: Results with various sampling strategies of runs that used a sample that contained parses which were randomly and uniformly selected out of the set, of all possible parses.
The classification accuracy results for this sampler are averaged over 10 runs.
The column marked SCFG shows the results obtained when using a salnple that contained 1)arses that were retrieved using the probabilistic unI)acking strategy.
This did not involve retrieving all possible parses for each sentence in the training set,.
Since there is no random component, the results arc fl'om a single run.
Here, parses were ranked using a stochastic context free backbone approximation of TSG.
Parameters were estimated using simple counting.
FinMly, the eohunn marked Ref shows the results ol)tained when USillg a sample that contained the overall n-best parses per sentence, as defined in terms of the reference distril)ution.
As a baseline, a nlodel containing randomly assigned weights produced a classification accuracy of 45% on the held-out sentences.
These results were averaged over 10 runs.
As can be seen, increasing the sainple size produces better results (for ca& smnl)ling strategy).
Around a smnple size of 40k parses, overfitting starts to manifest, and perIbrmance bottoms-out.
One of these is therefore our inforinative sample.
Note that the best smnple (40k parses) is less than 20% of the total possible training set.
The ditference between the various samplers is marginal, with a slight preference for Rand.
However the fact that SUFG sampling seems to do ahnost as well as Rand sampling, and fllrthermore does not require unpacking all parses, makes it the sampling strategy of choice.
SCFG sampling is biased in the sense that the sample produced using it will tend to concentrate around those parses that are all close to the best, parses.
Rand smnpling is unbiased, and, apart h'om the practical problems of having to recover all parses, nfight in some circumstances be better than SCFG sampling.
At the time of writing this paper, it was unclear whether we could combine SCFG with Rand sampling -sample parses from the flfll distribu590 lion without unpacking all parses.
We suspect that for i)robabilistic unt)acking to be efficient, it nmst \]:ely upon some non-uniform distribution.
Unpacking randomly and uniformly would probably result in a large loss in computational eliiciency.
6.2 Larger
Scale Evaluation Here we show results using a larger salnl)le and testing set.
We also show the effects of lexicalisation, overtitting, and overfitting avoidance using a Gaussian prior.
Strictly speaking this section could have been omitted fl'om the paper.
However, if one views estimation using an informative sami)le as overfitling avoi(lance, then estimation using a Gaussian l)rior Call be seen as another, complementary take on the problem.
The experimental setup was as follows.
We ralldomly split the Wall St, reel: Journal corpus into a training set and a testing set.
Both sets contained sentence.s t;hat were at most 30 tokens hmg.
When creating the set of parses used to estimate Ii.FMs, we used the SCFG approach, and retained the top 25 parses per sentence.
Within the training set (arising Dora 16, 200 sentences), there were 405,020 parses.
The testing set consisted of 466 sentences, with an average of 60.6 parses per sentence.
When evahmtillg, we retrieved at lllOSt 100 lmrscs per sentence in the testing set and scored them using our reference distribution.
As lmfore, we awarded ourselves a i)oinl; if the most probable testing parse (in terms of the I/.MF) coincided with the most t)rol)able parse (in terms of the reference distribution).
In all eases, we ran IIS tbr 100 iterations.
For the tirst experiment, we used just the first telnp\]at('.
(features that rc'la.t(;d to DC(I insl;antiations) to create model l; the second experiment uso.d the first and second teml)lat(~s (additional t'eatm'o.s relating to PP attachment) to create model 2.
The linal experiment used all three templat('~s (additional fea,tllres that were head-lexicalised) to create model 3.
The three mo(lels contained 39,230, 65,568 and 278, 127 featm:es respectively, As a baseline, a model containing randomly assigned weights achieved a 22% classification accuracy.
These results were averaged over 10 runs.
Figure 3 shows the classification accuracy using models 1, 2 and 3.
As can 1)e seen, the larger scale exl)erimental results were better than those achieved using the smaller samples (mentioned in section 6.1).
The reaSell for this was because we used longer sentc,11ces.
The. informative sainple derivable Kern such a training set was likely to be larger (more representative of 54 52 5O o>, ~, 48 o < 46 44 42 I I i . I, . A..
I i ...
I ..
~'\.,/',--"'.
'".. .... ..model1 ........
"ff ~ "~ ~L model2 ......
/....,' ~ model3 ....
_,,,,,,.........
. ~_\/..~ \ 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Iterations Figure 3: Classification Accuracy tbr Three Models Estinmted using Basic IIS 56 --~ r r \] l 1 l 1 7 54 52 50 o~ ~: 4a 46 44 42 model1 --model2 ..... 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 1 O0 Iterations Figure .l: Classification Accuracy for .\[hre(.
Models Estinmted using a Gmlssian Prior and IIS the population) than the informative sample derival)led from a training set using shorter, less syntat'tically (Xmll)lex senten(:es.
With the unle.xicalised model, we see (:lear signs of overfitting.
Model 2 overfits even more so.
For reasons that are unclear, we see that the larger model 3 does not ai)pem: to exhibit overtitting.
We next used the Gaussian Prior method of Chen and Rosenfeld to reduce overfitting (Chen and Rosenfeld, 1999b).
This involved integrating a Gaussian prior (with a zero mean) into Ills and searching for the model that maximised the, product of the likelihood and prior prolmbilities.
For the experiments reported here, we used a single wlriante over the entire model (better results might be achievable if multiple variances were used, i)erhaps with one variance per telnl)late type).
The aetllal value of the variance was t'cmnd by trial-and-error.
Itowever, optimisation using a held-out set is easy to achieve,.
591 We repeated the large-scale experiment, but this time using a Gaussian prior.
Figure 4 shows the classification accuracy of the models when using a Gmlssian Prior.
When we used a Gaussian prior, we fotmd that all models showed signs of imt)rovenmnt (allbeit with varying degrees): performance either increased, or else did not decrease with respect to the munber of iterations, Still, model 2 continued to underperform.
Model 3 seemed most resistent to the prior.
It theretbre appears that a Gaussian prior is most useful for unlexicalised models, and that for models built from complex, overlapping features, other forms of smoothing must be used instead.
7 Comments
We argued that RFM estimation tbr broad-coverage attribute-valued grammars could be made eomputationally tractable by training upon an inforlnative sample.
Our small-scale experiments suggested that using those parses that could be etliciently unpacked (SCFG sampling) was ahnost as effective as sampling from all possible parses (R~and salnplillg).
Also, we saw that models should not be both built and also estimated using all possible parses.
Better results can be obtained when models m'e built and trained using an intbrmative san@e.
Given the relationshi I) between sample size and model complexity, we see that when there is a danger of overfitting, one should build models on the basis of all informative set.
Itowever, this leaves open the possil)ility of training such a model upon a su1)erset of the, informative set;.
Although we ha.re not tested this scenario, we believe that this would lead to t)etter results ttlan those achieved here.
The larger scale experiments showed that IFMs can be estimated using relatively long sentences.
They also showed that a simple Gaussian prior could reduce the etfects of overfitting.
However, they also showed that excessive overfitting probably required an alternative smoothing approach.
The smaller and larger experiments can be both viewed as (complementary) ways of dealing with overfitting.
We conjecture that of the two approaches, the informative smnple al)proach is preferable as it deals with overfitting directly: overfitting results fi'om fitting to complex a model with too little data.
Our ongoing research will concentrate upon stronger ways of dealing with overfitting in lexicalised RFMs.
One line we are pursuing is to combine a compression-based prior with an exponential model.
This blends MDL with Maximum Entropy.
We are also looking at alternative template sets.
For example, we would probably benefit fi'om using templates that capture more of the syntactic context of a rule instantiation.
Acknowledgments We would like to tliank Rob Malouf, Domfla Nie Gearailt and tim anonymous reviewers for comments.
This work was supported by tile TMR Project Lcar'nin9 Computational Grammars.

