Learning Word Clusters from Data Types Paolo Allegrini, Simonetta Montemagni, Vito Pirrelli Istituto di Linguistica Comlmtazionale CNR Via della Faggiola 32, Pisa, Italy { allegrii),simo,vito } @ilc.pi.cnr.it Abstract The paper illustrates a linguistic knowledge acquisition model making use of data types, infinite nlenlory, and an inferential mechanism tbr inducing new intbrmation Dora known data.
The mode\] is colnpared with standard stochastic lnethods applied to data tokens, and tested on a task of lexico semantic classification.
1 Introduction
and Background Of late, consideral)le interest has been raised by the use of local syntactic contexts to automatically in&me lexico-semantic classes from parsed corI)ora (Pereira and Tishby 1992; Pereira ct al.
1993; Rooth 1995; Rooth et al.1999). This family of approaches takes a 1)air of words (usually a verb plus a noun), and a syntactic relation holding 1)etween the two in context (llSllally the ol)ject), and calculates its token distribution in a training corI)us.
These (:omits deline the range of more or less tyi)ical syntactic collocates selected by a verb.
The semat> tic similarity between words is then delined in terms of sul)stitutability in local contexts (see also Grefenstette 1994; I.,in 1998): two verbs are semantically close if they typically share the same range of collocates; conversely, two nouns are semantically close if they take l)art in the same tyl)e of selection dependencies, i.e. if they arc selected t)y the same verbs, with the same function.
\]~q'onl this perspective, a syntactically asymmetric relation (a dependency) is reinterpreted as a semantic co-selection, where each term of the relation can be defined with respect to the other.
This symmetric similarity metric is often ac(;omi)anied by the non trivial assuml)tion that th, c,semantic classification of both vcrb,s and nouns be symmetric too.
This is enforced by maximizing I7 ?tj), with to 1--1 where p(Ck) is the probability of class Ck 1)eing tbund in the training corpus, and p(vi\[Ck) and p(nj\[Ci~) define the probability that verb vi and noun nj be associated with the semantic dimension (or meaning component) of class C/~.
Intuitively, the joint distribution of fimctiona.lly mmotated verb-noun pairs is accounted for t)y assuming thai; each l)air meml)er indel)endently correlates with the same semantic dimension, or selection type (Rooth 1995), a concel)tual pair de.fining all pairs in the class: <g.
"scalar motion", "communicative action" etc.
The al)proach has the potential of dealing with polysemous words: as the same word can in principle belong to more than one (-lass, there are good reasons to expect that the corresponding selection type positively correlates with one and only one sense of polysemous words.
A further t)omls of the al)I)roach is that it makes it exi)licit the perspectivizing factor underlying the discovered similarity of words in a class.
On a less positive side, poorly selective verbs (i.e.
verbs which potentially combine with any 1101111) Sllch as give, find or get tend to stick together in highly probable classes, 1)ut apl)ear to stake out rather uIfinlbrmative senlantic dimensions, relating a motley collection of 11011118, such as part, way, reason and problem (Rooth 1995), whose only cominonality is the property of being freely interchangeable in the context of the above-mentioned verbs.
Another related issue is how many such dinlensions are necessary to account tbr the entire variety of senses attested in the training corpus.
This is an empirical question, but we contend an inipor~ant one, as the usal)ility of the result;lag (:lasses heavily dot)ends (m it.
It is (:ommon knowledge that verbs can 1)c, exceedingly (-hoosy ill tile way they select their collocates.
Hence, one is Mlowed to use the class Ck to make t)re dictions about the set of collocates of a verb v~, only if P(v,:\]C~) is sufficiently high.
Conversely, if CI~ hal)pens to poorly (:orrelate with any verb, the set of nouns in Ck is unlikely 1;o reflect any lexical selection.
This coml)ounds wii;h the 1)rol)lent that the meaning of a verb vi can significantly involve more lihalt Olte Selltalltic (timension: at i;he plesenl; stage of research in (:Olnlmtat;iollal lexical SO, lnanti('s, Ire scholar has shown what fun(:tion relal;es l;lm nmaning components of vi to its sehx:tional behaviom'.
There is wide room for flu'ther resear(:h in this area, but truly ext)lorative tools are still needed.
Finally, the des(:ribe(t method is a(:ul;c, ly t)rone to the 1)roblem of si)arse data.
A ll;l)ough i,(cl,,,) is rightly ext)e(:ted to converg(, faster,:ha:, p(,,l.,), still (:o,,vergcu(:e of,(Cl',,),:al, b(, ex(:(;edingly sh)w with low frequen('y nouns.
It is moo|; i;ll;~I; sieving more and more (:()rims (tat~ is a solution in all (:ases, its word fl'cquen(:y is highly sensitive to changes in text genre, topic and domain (S(:hiitze and Pede, rsen 1993).
2 The
approach Ih~re we illustrate a (lifl'er(mt; at)l)roa('h t() a(> (is|ring lexico semant;i(" (:lasses from sy~,ta('t;i(:ally lo(-al ('ontexts.
Like the family of sto(:hastie metho(ts of se(:tion 1, we make use of ~t simibu:ity ntel;ric 1)ased on sul)stitui;ability ill (ve, rb,noun,flntction) tril)les.
We also share the assumption that lexi(:o semantic classes are inherently multidimensional, as they heavily depend on cxis|;ence of a perspectivizing factor.
Yet, we depart from other assmnt)tions.
Classification of verl)s an(l n(mns is asymmetric: two IIOIIIIS {Ll'e similar if (;hey collo(:ate with as many semantically diverse vcrl)s as possible in as many (tifli:rent syntactic contexts as l)ossit)le.
The converse apl)lies to verbs.
In other words, semantic similarity of nom:s is not conditional on the similarity of their ac(:oml)anying verbs, and vicevcrsa.
In a sells(',, classification brc, aks th, c symmetry: maximization of the silnilarity of nouns (verbs) may cause minimization of the similarity of i;heir accoml)anying verbs (nouns).
A (:lass where a maximum of noun similarity correlates with a lni~ximmn of verb similarity cm~ be uninforniative, as exeml)litied above by the ease of t)oorly selective verbs.
Secondly, we assmne (following Fodor 1998) that the number of t)erst)ectivizing factors governing lexieal selection may have the order of magnitude of the lexicon itself.
The use of global semantic dimensions may smooth out lexical t)refcrences.
This is hardly what we need to semantically annotate lexical l)reti;rences.
A more conservative al)proa(:h to the t)rol)lem, inducing local semantic ('lasses, (:an (:oml)ine al)1)licability to real language 1)recessing l)roblen~s with the fln'l;lmr t)omls of exploring a relatively mmharted territory.
Thirdly, p(vi, nj) ai)t)ears to be too sensitive to changes in text genre, tol)ic lind domain to be eXl)ectcd to converge reliably.
We prefer to ground a similarity metric oIx measuring the correlation among verb noun, type, s ratlw, r than |eke, as, tbr two basic reasons: i) verl) noun types arc (tis(:retc, ;m(t less l)rone t;o random variation in it (parsed) (:orpus, ii) verl) noun tyl)eS (:ml reliably l)e a(:(tuir(xl from highly intbrm~ttive trot hardly redundant knowledge sources such as h~xi(:a an(1 encyclot)aedias.
Finally, our information refit tbr measuring wor(t similarity is not a (:Oul)le of context sharing pairs (e.g.
(set, sta.ndard,obj) and (sct, re.cord,obj)) but a qv, ad'r'uplc, of such context;s, tbrme(t 1)y (:ombining two verbs with two.(,.))s (,.,. a.d ), such that they enter an av, ah)gical proportion.
2.1 The
analogical proportion In the t)resenl; conl;ext, an anah)gieal prot)ortion (hereafl;er AP) is a quadrui)le of flmctionally mmotated t)airs resulting from tile combination of any two ltOllllS 'l~, i and ~3.j wit;h any two verbs v/,.
and vt su(:h as (2) holds: (v~.,ni,f,,,) : (v~.,nj,L,,)= (v,,ni, fn) : (vt,nj,fiz), (2) where terms along the two diagonals can sw~p t)lace in the 1)rot)ortion, and identity of subs(:ript indi(:ates identity of wflues.
Three aspects of (2) are worth eml)hasizing in this context.
First, it does not require that the stone syntactic time|ion hold 1)etween all pairs, but only that time|ions be pairwisc identical.
Moreover, (2) does not cover all possible syntactic contexts where hi, uj, "vk and vt may coral)|he, but only th, ose where verb and .function values co-vary.
(.set, standard, obj) : (,set, record, obj) = (meet, standard, obj) : (,,,.tet:,record, x) (3) We call this constraint tile "same-verb-same flmction" principle.
As we will see in section 2.3, the principle has important consequences on tile sort of similarity induced by (2).
Finally, if one uses subscripts as tbrmal constraints on type identity, then any term can be derived from (2) if the values of all other terms are known.
For example given tile partially instantiated propof tion in (3), the last term is filled in unambiguously by substituting x = fn = obj.
AP is an important generalization of the inter-substitutability assumption, as it extends tile assumption to cases of flmctionally heterogeneous verb-nonn pairs.
Intuitively, an AP says that, for two nouns to be taken as systematically similar, one has to be ready to 'ase th, cm interchangeably in at lea,st two different local contexts.
This is where the inferential and the classificatory perspectives meet.
2.2 Mathematical
background We gave reasons for defining the similarity metric as a flmction of verb-noun type correlation rather than verb noun token correlation.
In this section we sketch the mathematical framework underlying this assumption, to show that, tbr a set of verb nonn pairs with a unique syntactic function, AP is the smallest C that satisfies eq.(1).
Eq.(1) says that vi and nj are conditionally independent given C, meaning that their correlation only det)ends on the probability of their belonging to C, as tbrmally restated in eq.(4).
p(n, vlC) = p(nlC)p(vlC) (4) In passing from token to type frequency, we assume that a projection operator simply assigns a mfitbrm type probability to each event (pair) with a nonzero token probability in the training corpus.
From a learning perspective, this corresponds to the assumption that an infinite memory filters out events already seen during training.
The type probability pT(n,v) is defined as in eq.(5), where Np is the number of different pairs attested in the training corpus.
pT(n,v) = 1/Np if the pair is attested, pT(n,v) = 0 otherwise.
(5) By eq.(4), pT(n, vlC ) ¢ 0 if and only if pT(nlC) ~ 0 and pT(vlC) ~ O.
This amounts to saying that all verbs in C are freely interchangeable in the context of all nouns in C, and viceversa.
We will hereafter refer to C as a substitutability island ( SI).
AP can accordingly be looked at as the minimal SI.
The strength of correlation of nouns and verbs in each SI can be measured as a summation over the strength of all APs where they enter.
Formally, one can define a correlation score or(v, n) as the probability of v and n being attested in a pair.
This can be derived from our definition of pr(v,n), as shown in eq.(6), by substituting pT(n,v) = pr(v)pT(nlv) and pT(nlv ) = 1/w(v), where w(a) is tile type fi'equency of a (i.e.
number of different attested pairs containing a).
1 = = G (6) N,, G Eq.(6), after simplification, yields the tbllowing o< (7) By the same token, the correlation flmction c7(AP) relative to the 4 possit)le pairs in AP is calculated as cr(dP) = 1)7'('/)11~3,1 )PSF (~?,2 \[V\] )pT(V2 I'rl,2)PT(7~l \[?)2 ) (3( \[C0(~%1)C0(Vl )C0(~'1,2)C0('02)\] -1.
(g) Eq.(8) captures the intuition that the correlation score between verbs and nouns in AP is an inverse function of their type frequency.
Nouns and verbs with high type frequency occur in many different pairs: the less selective they are, the smaller their semantic contribution to cr(AP).
Our preference tbr a(AP) over el(v, n) underlies the definition of correlation score of SI given in eq.(9) (see also section 4).
-_Z (9) APESI 2.3 Breaking the symmetry In section 2.2 we assumed, for the sake of simplicity, that verbs and nouns are possibly related through one syntactic function only.
In a 10 proportion like (2), however, l;he syntactic timetion is allowed to wtry.
Nonetheless each rclal;ed S\] contains nouns which always combine with a given verb with one and the .same syntactic ./:unction.
Clearly, the Sallle is no|; true of verbs.
Suppose that an S1 contains two verbs vk and vt (say drive and pierce) and two nouns ni and nj (say nail and peg) that ~re respecl;ively el)jeer and subject of 'vl~ and yr.
The type of similarity in the resulting n(mn and verb clusters is of a completely ditti;rent nature: in the case of n(mns, we acquire dist'rib,utionally parallel words (e.g.
nail and peg); in the case of verbs, we get distrib'utionaIly correlated words (say drive and pierce) which are not interchangeable in the same conl;exl;.
Mixing the two types of distributional similarity in the same class makes little sense.
Hereafter, we will aim at maximizing the similarity of disl;ributionally parallel nouns.
In doing so, we will use functionally hel;erogencous contexts as in (2).
This breaks classitication symlne|,ry, and there is no guarantee I;hal; semantically coher(mt verb clust;ers be rcl;m'ncd.
3 The
method The section illusl;ratcs an at)plication of the principles of section 2 1;() 1;t5o task of clustering the set of object;s ot! a vo, rl) on t;he basis of a repository of flmctionally mmol;al;ed cont(;xts.
3.1 The
knowledge base The training evidence is a Knowledge.
Base (KB) of flm('tionally anno|;ated verb noun 1)airs, ins|;mltiating a wide rallg~e of syntactic relations: a) vert)objecl;, e.g.
(,~'a,,,.~,,,'c, ~,,'ol, lc,,z, obj) 'cause-1)roblenl'; b) verb subject, e.g.
(capitare, pwblcma subj) 'occur-problem'; c) verb prepositional_complement, e.g.
(recappare, probIcma, in,) 'run_into-problenl'.
The KaY contains 43,000 pair types, automatically extracted from different knowledge sources: dictionaries, both bilingual and monolingual (Montemagni 1995), and a corpus of tinancial newspapers (Federici st al.
1998). The two sources rettect two ditt'erent modes of lexical usage: dictionaries give typical examples of use of a word, and rmming corpora attest actual usage of words in specific enfl)edding domains.
These differences have all impact on the typology of senses which the two sources 1)rovi(le evidence for.
General dictionaries testitly all possible senses of a given word; tyl)ical word collocates acquired from dictionaries tend to cover the entire range of possible senses of a headword.
On the other hand, unrestricted texts reIlect actual usage and possibly bear withess to senses which are relevant to a specific domain only.
3.2 The
input words There is abundant psycholinguistic evidence that semantic similarity between words is eminently conI;exl; sensitive (Miller and Charles 1991).
Moreover, in many language processing tasks, word similarity is typically judged relative to an actual context, as in the cases of syntactic disambiguation (both structural and fulwtional), word sense disambiguation, and selection of the contextually approt)riate transla1;ion equiwflent of a word given its neighl)ouring words.
Finally, close examination of real data shows that (titl'erellt word senses select classes of complements according to different dilnensions of semantic similarity.
This is so pervasive, that it soon be(:omes impossit)le to t)rovide an efl'eclive account of these, dimensions independently of the sense in question.
Ewduation of botll accuracy and usability of any autontatic classitication of words into semantic clusters cammt lint artificially elude th(; 1)asic question "similar in what respc, ct;?".
Our choice of input words retlects these concerns.
\¥e automatically clustered the set of objects of a given verb, as they arc attested in a test col pus.
This yields local lexico seman;ic classes, i.e. conditional on the selected verb head, as opposed to global classes, i.e. built once and tbr all to accomlt tbr the collocates of any verb.
Among the practical advantages of local classitication we should at least mention the following two.
Choice of a verb head as a perspectivizing factor considerably reduces the possibility that the same polysemous object collocate is used in different senses with the same verb.
Fnrthermore, the resulting clusters can give intormal;ion about the senses, or meaning facets, of the verb head.
a.a Identification and ranking of noun clusters For the sake of concreteness, let us consider the tbllowing object-collocates of the Italian verb 11 {APPESANTIMENTO~ CRESCITA, FLESSIONE, RIALZO} {CRESCITA, FLESSIONE} {CRESCITA, GUAI0} {CRESCITA, PROBLEMA} {CRESCITA, RITARD0} {FLESSIONE, PROBLEMA} {FLESSIONE, RIALZO} {GUAI0, PROBLEMA} {RIDIMENSIONAMENT0, RITARD0} Figure h Some Sis headword causarc.
: CAUSARE/O, REGISTRARE/O : CAUSARE/O, EVIDENZIARE/S, MEDIARE/O, MOSTRARE/O~ PRESENTARE/S, PRESENTIRE/O REGISTRARE/O, REGISTRARE/$ : CAUSARE/0, PROVOCARE/0 AVERE/S~ CAUSARE/0, EVIDENZIARE/0 PORRE/S, PRESENTARE/S CAUSARE/O, USARE/S CAUSARE/0, PRESENTARE/S, STARE/S CAUSARE/0, REGISTRARE/0 REGISTRARE/S, SUBIRE/0 CAUSARE/0, CAVARE -SI/S, INCAPPARE/S CAUSARE/O, GIUSTIFICARE/O relative to the collocates of the causare 'cause', as they are found in a test corpus: appcsantimento 'increase in weight', crescita 'growth', flessionc 'decrease', guaio 'trouble', p~vblcma 'prol)lem', rialzo 'rise', ridimensionamcnto 'reduction', ritardo 'delay', turbolenza 'turbulence'.
Clustering these input words requires preliminary identification of Substitutability Islands (Sis).
An example of SI is the quadruple tbrmed by the verb pair causare 'cause' and ineapparc 'rnn into' and the noun pair guaio 'trouble' and problema 'problem', where menfl)ers of the same pair are inter-substitutable in context, give:: the constraints entbrced by the AP type in (2).
Note that guaio and problema are objects of eausare, and prepositional complements (headed by in 'in') of incappare.
This makes it possible to maximize the sinfilarity of trouble and problem across fimctionally heterogeneous contexts.
Bigger Sis than the one just shown will form as many APs as there are quadruples of col:textually interchangeable nouns and verbs.
We consider a lexico-semantic cluster of nouns the projection of an SI onto the set of nouns.
Fig.1 illustrates a sample of noun clusters (between curly brackets) projected from a set of Sis, together with a list of the verbs tbund in the same Sis (the suffix 'S' stands tbr subject, and 'O' for object).
Due to the asymmetry of classification, verbs in Sis are not taken to tbrm part of a lexico-semantic cluster in the same sense as nonns are.
7.04509e-O5GUAIO,PKOBLEMA} 7.01459e-O5RIDIMENSIONAHENTO,RITARDO} 4.65858e-O5CRESCITA,FLESSIONE} I.T5699e-O5FLESSIONE,RIALZO} 9.49509e-O6APPESANTIMENTO,CRESClTA,FLESSIONE,RIALZO} 1.88964e-O6CRESCITA,GUAIO} 1.19814e-O6CRESCITA,RITARDO} 8.84254e-OTCRESCITA,PROBLEMA} 6,TI41e-OTFLESSIONE,PROBLEMA} Figure 2: Nine top-most scored noun clusters Not all projected noun clusters exhibit the same degree of semantic coherence.
Intuitively, the cluster {appesantimento crescita flessione riaIzo} 'increase in weight, growth, decrease, rise' is semantically more appeMing tlmn the cluster {crescita problema} 'growth problem' (Fig.l).
A quantitative measure of the sen:antic cohesion of a noun cluster CN is give:: by the con'elation score ~(SI) of the SI of which UN is a projection.
In Fig.2 noun clusters are ranked by decreasing vahms of cr(SI), calculated according to eq.(9).
3.4 Centroid
identification Noun clusters of Figs.1 and 2 are admittedly considerably fine grained.
A coarser grain can be attained trivially through set union of inte:'secting clusters.
In fact, what we want to obtain is a set of mazimally orthogonal and semantically coherent noun classes, under the assumption that these (:lasses highly correlate with the principal meaning components of the verb head of which input nouns are objects.
In the algorithm ewfluated here this is achieved in two steps: i) first, we select the best possible centroids of the prospective classes among the noun clusters of Fig.2; secondly, ii) we lmnp outstanding clusters (i.e.
clusters which have not been selected in step i)) around the identified centroids.
In what tbllows, we will only focus on step i).
Results and evaluation of step ii) are reported in (Allegrini et al.2000). In step i) we assume that centroids are disjunctively defined, maximally coherent classes; hence, there exists no pair of intersecting centroids.
The best possible selection of centroids will include non intersecting clusters with the highest possible cumulative score.
In practice, the best centroid corresponds to the 12 cluster with the topmost cr(SI).
The second best centroid is the cluster with the second highest o-(SI) and no intersection with the first; centroid, and so on (the i-th centroid is 1;11(', i.-th highest chlster with no intersection with the tirst i 1.
centroids) until all clusters in the rank are used Ill).
Clusters selected as centroids in the causare example above ~tre: {GUAIO PROBLEMA}, {RIDIMENSIONAMENTO RITARDO}, {CaP.SCITA FL~.SS-rONE}.
Clearly, this is not the only t)ossible strategy t'or centroid selection, lint certainly a suitabh; one giv(;n our assulnl)tions mM goals.
To stun Ul), the targeted classification is local, i.('., conditional on a specific verl~ head, and orthogonal, i.c. it aims at identifying maximally disjulmtive classes with high correlation with the principal meaning ('Oral)orients of the vert) head.
This strategy h;ads to identificalfion of the different senses, or possibly me,ruing facets, of a vert).
In tlteir turn, noun clusters may capture sul)tle semm~tic distinctions.
For instance,, a distinction is made between incremental eveni;s or results of incrt'anental e, vents, which 1)resut)l)OSe ~ scalar dimension (as in the ease of {cre,,s'cita,/lcssione} 'growth, decrease') and re, scheduling eve, nts, where a change occurs with respect to a previously planned event or object (see the centroid {ridimensiov, amento ritardo} :reduction debw' ).
4 Experiment
and evaluation We, were able to extract all S l's relative to the entire K\]3.
However, we report here an intrinsic evaluation of the accuracy of acquired ce.ntroids which involves ()lily a small subset of our results, since provision of a refhrence class tyl)ology is extremely labour intensive.
1 We
consider 20 Italian verbs and their object collocates.gThe object collocates were automatically extracted fi'om the "Italian SPAIIKLE Reference Corpus", a corpus of Italian financial 1For an extrinsic evahlation of the proposed similarity measure the reader is referred to (Montemagni et aI.
1996; Briscoe ct al.
1999; Federici ct al.
1999a). 2The |x,'st verbs are: a.qgiungcrc 'add', aiutare 'hell)', a,sl)cttarc 'expect', cambiarc 'change', C(t*taO,?'t: t(:}tllSe:~ chicdcrc 'ask', considc.rarc 'consider', dare.
'give', dcciderc 'decide', fornive 'provide', muoverc.
'move', pcrm~'.ttere 'allow', portarc 'bring', p~wlurrc 'produce', sccglicrc 'choose', sentirc 'feel', stabilire 'establislF, tagliarc 'cut', terminate 'end', trovarc 'find'.
newspapers of about one million word tokens (Federici ct al.
1998). l?or each test verb, an indetmndent classification of its collocates was created lnanually, by partitioning the collocates into disjoint sets of semantically coherent lexical preferences, each set pointing to distinct senses of the test; verb, according to a reference monolingual dictionary (Garzanti 1984).
This considerably reduces the anlount of subjectivity inevitably involved in the creation of a reference partition, and minimizes the probability that more than one sense of a t)olysemous noun can appear in the same class of collocates.
The inferred centroids, selected from clusters ranked by c~(SI) defined as in (9), are t)rojected ~gainst the reference classification.
Precision is delined as the ratio between 1;t1(; mmflmr of controids t)roperly inchlded in one reference class and l;he nmnber of inferred centroids.
Recall is defined as the ratio between the number of relhrtime classes which properly inchlde at least one centroid an(t the nmnber of all reference classes.
Fig.3 shows results for the sets of object collocates of 1)olysemous {;est verbs only, as lttOltOSemous verbs trivially yMd 100% precision recall.
An average, wflue over the sets of object collocates of all verbs is also shown, with 86% 88% of precision recall.
Another average value is also l)lotted (as a black ul)right triangle), ol)l:ained \])y ranking n(mn clusters l)y ~(S\]) calculated as ill (10).
This average wflue (53% 53% precision recall) provides a sort of baseline of the difliculty of the task, and sheds considerable light on the use of APs, rather than simple verb noun pairs, as inforlnation units ibr measuring internal cohesion of centroids.
(si) =_ (10) (n,v)G91 5 Conclusion We described a linguistic knowledge acquisition model and tested it; on a word classification task.
The main points of our prot)osal are: • classification is asymmetric, grounded on principles of machine learning with intinite memory; • the algorithm is explorative and nonreductionist; no a priori model of class dis13 ' i ............
T L ......... i:i: ! AIUTARE I ICAMBIARE 0.9 CHIEDERE CONSIDERARE • bARE ',?DECIDERE 0.8 PORTARE PRODURRE • SCEGLIERE ~ SENTIRE STABILIRE ~TAGLIARE \[:1~ • ~:TFIOVA RE 0.6 ~'AVERAGE(AP) ~AVERAGE(pai 0 i • i o.5 ::.i • '1 I i 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0,7 0.8 0.9 1 PRECISION d < ~ 0.7 Figure 3: Centroid precision and recall for object collocates of polysemous verbs.
tril)ution is assmned; • classification is modelled z~s the task of forming a web of context dependent semantic associations among words; • the approach uses a context--sensitive notion of semantic similarity; • the approach rests on the notion of analogical proportion, which proves to t)e a reliable intbrmation refit for measuring semantic similarity; • analogical t)roportions are harder to track down than simple pairs, and interconnected in a highly complex way; yet, reliance on data types, as opposed to token frequencies, makes the proposed method comtmrationally tractable and resistant to data sparseness.

