Prosody and the Resolution of Pronominal Anaphora Maria Welters lnstitut l'i.ir Komlnunikationsforschung und Phonetik, Universitfit Bonn Poppelsdorfer Alice 47, D-53115 Bonn wolters@ikp.uni-bonn, de Donna K.
Byron Department of Computer Science University of Rochester Re.
Box 270226, Rochester, NY 14627 dbyron@cs, rochester, edu Abstract In this paper, we investigate the acoustic prosodic marking o\[" demonstrative and personal pronouns in taskoriented dialog.
Although it has been hypothesized that acouslie marking affects pronoun resolution, we find flint {l~e prosodic information extracted from tile data is not sufficienl to predict antcceden! lype reliably.
Interspeaker variation accottnts for mt, ch of lhe prosodic variation that we find in our data.
We conclude that prosodic cues shot, ld be handled with care in robust, speakerindependenl dialog systems.
1 Introduction
Previous work on anaphora resolution has yieMed a rich basis of theories and heuristics for finding antecedenls.
However, most research to date has neglecled an important potential cue that is only available in spoken data: prosody.
Prosodic marking can be used to change the antecedent of a pronoun, as demonsh'ated by lifts classic example from l.akoff ( 1971 ) (capitals indicalc a pitch accent): ( I ) Johll i called Jimj a Relmblican, then hei insulted himj.
(2) Johlll called Jim./ a Republican, then lllj illsulled lllMi.
But exactly how the antecedent changes due to the prosodic marking on tile pronoun, and whefller this effect happens consistently, is an open question.
If consislcnl elfecls do exisl, they would be useful for online pronoun inlerpretation in spoken dialog systems.
Prosodic prominence directs tile attention of the listener to what is important for understanding and inteF pretation.
But how should this principle be applied when words that are normally not very prominent, such as prollouns, are accented?
More generally, does acoustic marking provide syslemalic cues to characteristics of amecedents?
IVlore specitically, does it imply that tile antecedent is "untmtml" in some wily'?
These arc tile two hypofl/eses we investigate in this paper.
()ur data consists of 322 pronouns from a large corpus of spomaneous lask-orientcd dialog, the TRAINS93 corpus (Hee~ man and Allen, 1995).
This corpus allows us to study pronotms as they occur in spontaneous unscripted disCOLlrse, al)d is erie of tile very few speech corporit to have been annotated with pronoun interpretation infommtion.
The remainder oF this paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we SUllllllill'iZe relevant work on pl'OllOUn resolution and report on tile few proposals for integrating prosody into pronoun resolution algorithms.
Next, in Section 3, we present tile dialogs used for our study and the attributes awfilable in tile annotation data, while Section 4 describes file acoustic measures that were cornpuled automatically from the data.
Section 5 explores whelher there are syslematic correlations between these properties and tile acoustic measures fundamental frequency, duralion, and inlensity.
For lhese measures, we find Ihat nlost correlations are in fact due to speaker varialien, and fl/a/ speakers differ greatly in their overall prosodic characleristics.
Finally, we investigate whether it is possible to use Ihesc acoustic features to predict prope,'ties of tile antecedent using logistic regression.
Again, we do not find acoustic features to be reliable prediclors for lhe l'catures of inleresl.
Therefore, we conchide in Section 6 lhat acoustic measures cannot be used in sl)eaker-independenl online anaphora resolution algorithms to predict lhe features under investigation here.
2 Background
and Related Work There is a rich literature ¢)11 resolving personal pronouns.
Many approaches arc based on a notion of attentional foctls.
Entities in attentional focus are highly salient, and pronouns are assumed to refer to tile most salient entity in lhc discourse (el.
(Brennan el al., 1987; Azzam et ill., 1998; Strube, 1998)).
Centering (Grosz et al., 1995) is a i}amework for predicting local attentional focus.
It assumes that tile most salient entity from sentence,3,,_\] that is realized in sentence,5',, is most likely to be pronominalized in,3,z.
That entity is termed the Cb (backward-looking center) of sentence,5',,.
Finding ille preferred ranking criteria is an active area of research.
Byron and Stem (1998) adapted this approach, which had previously been applied to text, for spoken dialogs, but wilh linfited st,ccess.
\]n contrast to personal pronouns, demonstratives do not rely on calculalions of salience.
In fact, Linde (1979) found lhat while it was preferred for entities within the 919 current local t'ocus, that was used for items outside the current focus of attention.
Passonneau (1989) showed that personal and demonstrative pronouns are used in contrasting situations: personal pronouns are preferred when both the pronoun and its antecedent are in subject position, while demonstrative pronouns are preferred when either the pronoun or its antecedent is not ill subject position.
She also found that personal pronouns tend to co-specify with pronouns or base noun phrases; the more clauseor seutence-likc the antecedent, the more likely the speaker is to choose a demonstrative pronoun.
Pronoun resolution algoritlnns tend not to cover demonstratives.
Notable exceptions are Webber's model for discotn'se deixis (Webbcr, 1991) and the model developed for spoken dialog by Eekert and Strube (1999).
This algorithm encompasses both personal and delnonstrative pronouns and exploits their contrastive usage patterns, relying on syntactic clues and verb subcategorizations as input.
Neither study investigated the intluence of prosodic prominence on resolution.
Most previous work on prosody and pronotm resolution has focussed on pitch accents and third person singular pronouns that co-specify with persons.
Nakatani (1997) examined the antecedents of personal pronouns in a 20-minute narrative monologue.
She found that pronouns tend to be accented il' they occur in subject position, and if the backward-looking center (Grosz et al., 1995) was shifted to the referent of that pronoun.
She then extended this result to a general theory of the interaction between l)rominencc and discourse structure.
Cahu (1995)discusses accented prorJouns on the basis of a theory about accentual correlates of salience.
Kamcyama (1998) interprets a pitch accent on pronouns in the fl'amework of Ihe alternative semantics (Rooth, 1992) theory o1' focus.
She assumes that all potential antecedents are stored in a list.
Pronouns arc then resolved to the most preferred antecedent on that list which is syntactically and semantically compatible with the pronoun.
Preference is modeled by an ordering on the set ol' antecedents.
An accent on lhe pronoun signals that pronoun resolution should not be based on the default ordering, where the default is computed by a nmnber of interacting syntactic, semantic, pragmatic, and attentional constraints.
Compared to he and she, it and that lmve been somewhat neglected.
There are two reasons for this: First, it is not considered to be as accentable as he and she by native speakers of both British and American English, whereas that is more likely than it to beat" a pitch accent.
An informal study of the London-Lund corptts of spoken British English (Svartvik, 1990) confirmed that observation.
Second, that fi'cquently does not lmve a co-specifying NP antecedent, and most research on cospeciticatiou has focussed on pronouns and NPs.
Work on accented demonstratives and pronoun resolution is extremely scarce.
Pioneering studies were conducted by Ft'ethcim and his collaborators.
They tested the effect of accented sentence-initial demonstratives that co-specify with the preceding sentence on the resolution of ambiguous personal pronouns, and found that the pronoun antecedents switched when the demonstrative was accented (Fretheim ct al., 1997).
However, to otu" knowledge, there are no studies that compare the co-specification preferences of accented vs.
unaccented demonstratives.
3 The
Corpus: TRAINS93 Our data is taken from the TRAINS93 corpus of hunlunhuman problem solving dialogs in the logistics phnuting domain.
In these dialogs, one participant plays the role of the planning assistant and the other attempts to construct a plan for delivering specified cargo to its destination.
We used a subset of 18 TRAINS93 dialogs in which the referent and antecedent of third-person non-gendcrcd pronouns I had been attnotated in a previous study (Byron and Allen, 1998).
In the dialogs used for the present study, 322 pronouns (158 personal and 164 demonstralive) have been annotated.
Personal pronouns ill the dialogs are it, its, itselJ; them, the3,, their and themselves.
Demonstrative pronouns in the annotation data are that, this, these, those.
There are live nmle and 11 fenmle speakers.
One female speaker contributed 89 pronouns, two others produced more than 30 each (one female, one male), the rest is divided unevenly among tile remaining 13 speakers.
The set of dialogs chosen for annotation intentionally included a variety of speakers so that no speaker's idiosyncratic discourse strategies would be prevalent ill the resulting data.
Table 1 describes the attributes caplurcd for each pronoun.
These features were chosen for tile annotation because many previous studies have shown them to be imporlant for pronoun resolution.
Features illclude attributes of the pronoun, its antecedent (the discotu'se constituent Ihat previously triggered lhe referent), and its referent (the entity that should be substituted for the pronoun in a semantic representation of the sentence).
Cb was annotated using Model3 from (Byron and Stent, 1998) with a linear model of discourse structure.
Note that annolaled prononns were not limited to those with NP antecedents, as is tile case with most other studies.
In addition to NP antecedents, pronouns in this data set could have an antecedent of some other phrase or clause type, or no annomtablc antecedent at all.
There are two categories of pronouns with no annotalable antecedent.
Ill the simplest case, tim pronominal reference is the first mention of the referent ill tile dialog.
That happens when the referent is inferred liom the problem solving state.
For example, after" tile utterance send the engine to Coming and pick up the boxcars, a new discourse enI No gendcred entities exist in this co,'pus, so gendered pronouns wc,-c not inchtdcd.
All dcmonst,'ativc pronouns were annolated; howevcf, lhcre were only 5 occurrences of "this" in the selected dialogs, so eonstrasts between proxinml and distal dcmonslratives could not be studied.
920 Feature 11) l)escriplion I'RONTYPE Pronoutl Type I'RONSUB,I Pronoun is suljccl ANTI,\]I~()IM Antecedenl form I)IST I)islance to antecedent ANTESUILI Antecedent is subjcc!
CB Backward-looking center |trOllOU 11 category Possible Values def= tile pronoun is one of {it, its, itself, them, dmy, thcin themselves} dcm = the inonoun is one of {that, this, these, fllose} Y = prOllOtltl subject of lllaill clause of its ullerance N : pronotm not subject of main clause I'I~,()NOUN = antecedent is pronoun NI' = antecedent is tmse noun phrase N()N-NP = antecedent is other constituent, at most one utterance long NONE = pronotm is lit'st mention or antecedent length > one tttterance SAME = antecedent and pronoun in same utterance AI)J = antecedent and pronoun in adjacent utterances RIMOTE = antecedent more than one utterance before pronoun Y = alSteccdelll subject o1' the lllain chmse of its tttterance N = antecedent not subject of a main clause Y = pronoun is Cb of its utterance N = pronoun is not Cb DIST cldj.
I'CqllO\[¢ Table 1: The features avaihtble ill the annotation data set.
ANTE ANTESUBJ NP/pmn.
non-NP none yes no same 75.9% 6.3% 17.8 % 37.3% 62.7% 29.1% 28.0% 36.1t0% 36.0% 14.0% 86.11% 18.9% 51.60, 21.4% 27.0% 25.5% 74.5% 23.9% personal 33.5% 20.2% demonslrafive 29.9% 15.2% lolal 31.7% 17.7% 3hble 2: Typical properties of antccedcnts lbr personal and demonst,'ative pronouns ill file corpus.
All percentages are given relative to tile lolal ntnnber of pronouns in that category and rounded.
Boldface: most frequent antecedent property.
tity, tile train composed of tile engine and Ix)xcars, is awfilable for anaphoric reference.
In the more subtle case, Ihe entity was built from a stretch (51" discourse longer than one utterance.
In an effort to achieve an acceptable level of inier-annotalor agreelnenl for the aw nohltion, the maxinmm size \[or a consfiluenl to serve as ~tll ~ltllecedelll W\[lS de\[illed l(1 be OllC ullCl'~,lllCC, l)iscourse entities that are built fi'om longer she/chcs of lexl include objects such as tile entire 131an or tile discourse itself, and such items are less reliable lo annotate.
qaking the annotated dialogs as a whole, 21.4% of all prollouns have ;.l non-NP antecedent, and 27% do not have an mmolatal~le antecedent at a11.
qhble 2 shows thal tile default antecedenls o1' personal and denlonsh'alive pronouns follow the predictions of Schiffman (1985).
The antecedent of personal pronouns is most likely itself lo be a pronoun or a full NP, while demonstratives m'e most likely to have no antecedent, or if there is one, it is ntost likely to be a non-NR The main role of prosodic illlksr,nation is to help pronoun resolution algorithms identify cases where flmse default predictions are false.
4 Acoustic
Prosodic Cues Our selection (51' acottstic measures covers three classic components of prosody: fundamental frequency (IV()), duration, and intensity (Lehiste, 1970).
The relationship between those cues and prosodic pronlinencc has been demonstrated by e.g.
(Fant and Kruckenberg, 1989; Heufl, 1999).
Tile main correlate of English stress is F0, the second rues! imporlant is duration, and the least imporlanl is inlensity (1,chisle, 1970).
Therefore, we will pay more allelllioll lo F0 illeflsUl'eS.
Although cxperimenial results indicate flint 1;0 cues of pronlinencc can depend on the shape of file 1:0 conlour of the uucranec (c.f.
(Gussenhoven cl al., 1997)), we do nol control for such illleraclions.
\]llstead, we reslricl ourselves to cues that are easy to COnlpute fr(ml limiled dala, so that a running spoken dialogue system might be able to compute them in real time.
4.1 Acoustic
Measures Duration: For duration, we found lhat 1he logarithmic duration wllues a,'c nornmlly distributed, bolh pooled over all speakers and for lhoso speakers willl more than 20 pronouns.
Logariflmtic duration is also tile target variable of many duration models such as that of (van Santen, 1992).
We assume that speaker-related variation is covered by the w,'iance of lhis normal distribution; we can control for speaker effects by including a SPEAKER factor in our models.
F0 variables: F0 was computed using the \]2ntropic ESPS Waves tool get_f0 with standard settings and a frame rate (51' 10 ms.
All F0 wdues were transt'onned into lhe log-domain and then pooled imo mean, minimum, and maximum F0 values for each word and each utterance.
This log donmin is well motiw~led psychoacoustically (Zwicker and lhtstl, 1990).
F0 range was computed oil the values in tile log-domain.
We assume lhat the Iogm'ithm of F0 has a nomml distribution.
Therefore, we 921 can nommlize for speaker-dependent differences in pitch range by using z-scores, and we can use standard statistical analysis methods such as ANOVA.
Intensity: Intensity is measured as the root-meansquare (RMS) of signal amplitudes.
We measure RMS relative to a baseline as given by the formula log(lMS/RMSb~olino).
The baseline RMS was computed on the basis of a simple pause detection algorithm, which takes the first nmximum in the amplitude histogram to be the average amplitude of background noise.
The baseline RMS was slightly above that value.
4.2 Inter-Speaker Differences Since we need to pool data from many different speakers, we qeed to control for inter-speaker differences.
Tim number of pronouns we have fl'om each speaker varies between 1 for speaker GD and 86 for speaker CK.
Speakers PH, male, and CK, female, are the only ones to lmve produced more than 15 personal pronouns and 15 demonstratives.
In order to test whether the SPEAKER factor affects the choice between personal pronouns and demonstratives, we titted a logistic regression model with the target variable PRONTYPE (personal or demonstrative) and the predictorsANTE, ANTESUBJ, DIST, REFCAT, CBand SPEAKER (in this sequence).
REFCAT is an additional variable that describes the senmntic category of a pronoun's referent (eg.
donmin objects vs.
abstract entities).
Even though SPEAKER is the last factor in the model, an analysis of deviance shows a signilicant intlueuce (p<0.005,F=2.51,df13).
A possible explanation for this is that some speakers prefer to use demonstratives in contexts where others would choose a personal pronotm, and vice versa, or perhaps the SPEAKER variable mediates the intluence of a far,nore complex factor such as problem solving strategy.
Resolving this queslion is beyond the scope of this paper.
On the basis of F0, we can establish four groups of speakers: The first group consists of male speakers with a low mean F0 and a low F0 range.
In the next group, we find both male and female speakers with a low mean F0, but a far higher range.
Speaker PH belongs to this second group.
Interestingly, for these speakers, the mean F0 on pronouns is lower titan for those of the first group.
Groups 3 and 4 consist entirely of female speakers, with group 3 using a lower range than group 4.
Speaker CK belongs to group 4.
5 Exploring
Prominent Pronouns If data about prosodic prominence is to be useful for pronoun resolution, then there must be prosodic cues that carry information about properties of the antecedent.
In this section, we investigate if there are such cues for the properties that we have available in the annotation data, defined in ~lable 1.
More specitieally, we hypothesize that prosodic cues will be used if the antecedent is somewhat unusual.
For example, the results of Linde and Property ANTEFORFI DIST ANTESUBJ df all 3 range 3 none 2 dur Dam Set peJw.
dem. CK 110110 none none llono none none dur, nolle \])ors.: mean energy range Table 3: Significant Inlluences of Antecedent Properties (p <0.05) on Prosodic Cues.
inean=z-score mean F0, range=range of z-score F0, dur=logarithmic duration, dem=demonstratives, pets=personal pronotms Passonneau would lead us to expect that personal pronouns with non-NP antecedents and demonstratives with NP and pronoun antecedents will be marked.
Since the antecedents of pronouns tend to occur no more than 1-2 clauses ago, we would also expect pronouns with more remote antecedents to be marked.
A first qualitative look at the data suggets that even il' such these tendencies are present in the data, they might not turn out to be significant.
For example, in Figure 1, the means of lzmeanf0 behave roughly as predicted, but the variation is so large that these differences might well be due to chance.
5.1 Correlations
between Measures and Properties Next, we examine whether the measures delined in Seclion 4 correlate with any particular properties o1' the antecedent.
More precisely, if a property is cued by some aspect ot' prosody (either duration, F0, or intensity), then the prosody of a pronoun depends to a cerlain degree on its antecedent.
In a statistical analysis, we should lind a significant effect of the relevant antecedent property on the prosodic measure.
We selected ANOVA as our analysis method, because our prosodic target variables appear to have a normal distribution.
For each of the antecedent features delined above, we examined its inlluence on mean F0 (imeanf0), the zscore of mean F0 (lzmeanf0), the z-score of F0 range (lzrgf0), logarithmic duration (dur), and normalized energy (energy).
In addition, we added the tactors, PRONTYPE and SPEAKER.
Results: The results are summarized in Table 3.
For izmeanf0 and energy, the influence of SPEAKER is always considerable.
There are also consistent effects of the syntactic position of a pronoun: In general, demonstratives are shorter in subject position, and for CK, mean F0 on personal pronouns in subject position is higher than on non-subject ones (228 Hz vs.
190 Hz).
But when we turn to the factors that interest us lnOSt, properties of the antecedent, we cannot lind any consistent correlates, although in ahnost every data set, there are some prosodic cues to ANTESUBJ for personal pronouns.
But what these cues are may well depend on the speaker, as the results for CK show.
Her pitch range on pronouns with a stdjcct antecedent is double the range on pronouns with an antecedent in non-su/lject position.
922 E P¢l'SOlllll lirollOUllS T --:--7 : : " L ~ o ~ o o o° o I I I ~-NI I lie alllt~ non-NP I/lO "\['ype of AtllCci~dt~lll F~ 7 t ) I_qll O II,"i \[ fat i'¢ (~ PfoIIOIln~ : 8 NP IIO1|11\[~ noII-NP pfO Type of Alltcccdcnl y~ K 8 o -f t~on slkhi Persol|lll PfollOtlllS \]-1 ; o o o l-I II(II1L~ stilt Ai/tecctletll is Stlbjc'ct E o i Demonstrative Pronouns m Cl fi, 8 t --\]--i I|OII-SlIIj Ill)lie sulj AiItecctlct~l is Subject Figure 1: Distribution el: z-score of mean F0 for dilferellt values of ANTEFORM and ANTESUI3J Pronouns with subject antecedents are also considerably louder.
All ill all, antecedent prol)ertics can only acCOUllt for a very small percelltage of tile wtriatioll in these prosodic cues.
Therefore, we should i~ot expect the prosodic cues to be slablc, robust indicators for predictins antecedent properlies ill spoken dialog systems.
5.2 Inter-Speaker Variation we have sccn that inter-speaker di ffcrcl~ces cxpl;~i n much of the variation in the prosodic measures.
Table 4 gives an idea of the size and direction of these differences.
On the complete data set, wc lilKl that personal pronouns are shorlor lhan demonslratives, they have a lower intensity and show a higher average 1;0 (3~tble 4).
A closer examination reveals considerable inter-speaker variation in the data, illustrated in Table 4.
CK is fairly ptototypical.
PH barely shows the difference il~ F0, al~d for MF, the difference in intensity is actually reversed.
MF also has rather shor! demonstratives.
Such speakerspecilic wlriation callnot be eliminated by nomtalization.
It has to be controlled for in the statistical lcsls.
Discovering types of speakers is diflicult two of the 15 speakers, CK, and PH, con/ribute 48% of all pronouns.
5.3 Predicting
Properties of tile Antecedent Finally, we examine how much information prosodic cues yield about the ~tntecedent.
For this purpose, we set till a prediction lask not unlike one that all actual NLU syslenl l~lces.
The input variables arc the prosodic properties of the pronoun, whether the protloun is personal or demonstrative (P\]R.ONTYPE), whether it is the subject (PRONSUBJ), and whether it is sentence-initial (PRONZNIT).
From this, we now have to deduce l~roper lies of thc antecedent: syntactic i'olc (ANTESrdBJ), fern1 (ANTEFORM), and distance (DZST).
For prediction, wc used logistic regression (Agresti, 1990).
This has two advantages: not only can wc compare how well the differcnt regression models lit the data, wc call also re-analyze the titled model to determine which factors have a significant inlluence oll classiIication accuracy.
Firsl, we conslrucl a model on the basis of PRONTYPE, PRONSUBJ, and PRONINIT.
Then, we conslruct a model with these three faclors plus SPEAKER..
finally, we train a model with PRONTYPE, 923 Speaker dis'c.
all 156 Hz CK 188Hz PH 126 Hz MF 166 Hz mean F0 pelw.
dem. 157 Hz 142 Hz 208 Hz 187 Hz 109 Hz 110 Hz 184 Hz 182 Hz z-score mean pets.
dent -0.04 -0.24 0.31 0.00 -0.43 -0.47 0.32 0.26 duration pelw.
dem 161 ms 206 ms 151 ms 193 ms 179ms 252 ms 166 ms 164 ms intensity petw.
dem 2.36 2.38 2.51 2.54 2.57 2.84 2.69 2.40 Table 4: Inter-speaker variation in prosody, disc.: complete discourse.
All speakers: 322 pronouns, CK: 41 personal, 45 demonstrative, PH: 18 personal, 24 demonstrative, MF: 7 personal, 8 demonstrative PRONSUBJ, PRONINIT, SPEAKER and one of the three measures lzmeanf0, dur, energy.
The models are trained to predict whether there is an antecedent (task noAnte), whether the antecedent is a non-NP (task nonNP), whether the antecedent is remote (task remote), whether the antecedent is in subject position (task u j ante), and whether the antecedent is the current Cb (task cb).
All models are computed over the full data set, because the data set for speaker CK is not suflicient • for estimating the regression coefficients.
The models are then compared to see which step yielded a significant improvement: adding SPEAKER or adding the prosodic variable after we have accounted for SPEAKER variation.
Results: The results arc summarized in Table 5.
On all tasks except remote, PRONTYPE and PRONSUBJ performed well.
Both features have ah'oady been shown to be reliable cnes for prononn resoluti(m (c.f.
Section 2).
On task cb, only PRONTYPE can explain a signilicant amount of wuiation.
Models which include a speaker factor ahnost always fare better.
In models without speaker information, F0-relaled measures yield a larger reduction in deviance than the duration measure.
The reason for this is that the F0 measures preserve some information about the ditl'ercnt speaker strategies.
Once SPEAKER has been included as well, only dur leads to significant improvements on task nonNP (p<0.05).
Both demonstratives and personal pronouns are shorter when the antecedent is a non-NR 6 Conclusion and Outlook In this paper, we cxamincd patterns of acoustic prosodic highlighting of personal and demonstrative pronouns in a corpus of task-oriented spontaneous dialog.
To our knowledge, this is the lirst comparative study of this kind.
Wc used a straightforward, theory-neutral operationalization of "prosodic highlighting" that does not depend on complex algorithms for F0 stylization or (focal) accent detection and is thus very easy to incorporate into any real-time spoken dialog system.
We chose a spoken dialog corpus that includes demonstrativc pronouns because demonstratives are both a prominent feature of problem-solving dialogs and a sorely neglected lield of study.
In particular, we asked two questions: Do Speakers Signal Antecedent Properties Acoustically?
Based on our data, the answer to this question is: If they do,/hey do it in a highly idiosyncratic way.
We cannot posit any safe generalizations over several speakers, and li"om the perspective of an NLP application, such generalizations might even be dangerous.
In order to evaluate the impact of speaker strategies on the resolution of pronouns, we need more data 150 to 200 pronouns from 4-5 speakers each.
Collecting this amount of data in a dedicated corpus is inefficient.
Therefore, further acoustic investigations do not make much sense at this point; rather, the data should be examined carefully for tendencies which can form the basis for dedicated production and perception experiments which arc explicitly designed for uncovering inter-speaker variation.
Are Acoustic Features Useful for Pronoun Resolution?
The answer is: probably not.
At least for this corpus, we were not able to determine any numerical heuristics that could be utilized to aid pronoun resolution.
The logistic regression experiments show that on a speaker-independent basis, logarithmic duration might well be a reliable cue to certain aspects of a pronoun's antecedent.
In order to incorporate prosodic cues into an actual algorithm, we will need more training material and a principled evaluation procedure.
We will also need to take into account other influences, such as dialog acts and dialog structure.
Acknowledgements. Wc would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers, Rebecca Passonneau, Lncicn Galescu, James Alhm, Michael Strube, Dictmar Lancd and Wolf gang Hess for their comments on earlier vet'sions of this work.
Donna K.
Byron was funded by ONR research grant N00014-95-1-1088 and Columbia University/NSF research grant OPG:1307.
For all statistical analyses, wc used R (Ihaka and Gentleman, 1996).
924 \]hsk nonNP noAnte remote sjante cb significant illfluence PRONTYPE, PRONSUBJ, PRONINIT, dur PRONTYPE, PRONSUBJ, PRONINIT, SPEAKER.
110110 PRONTYPE, PRONSUBJ PRONTYPE, SPEAKER Table 5: Perlbrmance of Reg,'ession Models on Tasks.

