Chinese Syntactic Parsing Based on Extended GLR Parsing Algorithm with PCFG* Yan Zhang, Bo Xu and Chengqing Zong National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of sciences, Beijing 100080, P.
R. China E-mail: {yzhang, xubo, cqzong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn Abstract This paper presents an extended GLR parsing algorithm with grammar PCFG* that is based on Tomita’s GLR parsing algorithm and extends it further.
We also define a new grammar—PCFG* that is based on PCFG and assigns not only probability but also frequency associated with each rule.
So our syntactic parsing system is implemented based on rule-based approach and statistics approach.
Furthermore our experiments are executed in two fields: Chinese base noun phrase identification and full syntactic parsing.
And the results of these two fields are compared from three ways.
The experiments prove that the extended GLR parsing algorithm with PCFG* is an efficient parsing method and a straightforward way to combine statistical property with rules.
The experiment results of these two fields are presented in this paper.
1. Introduction Recently the syntactic parsing system is one of significant components in natural language processing.
Many parsing methods have been developed as the development of corpus linguistics and applications of linguistics.
Tomita’ GLR parsing (Tomita M., 1986, 1987) is the most general shift-reduce method of bottom-up parsing and widely used in syntactic parsing.
Several methods are based on it.
Lavie (Lavie A., 1996) used the GLR* parsing algorithm for spoken language system.
It uses a finite-state probabilistic model to compute the action probabilities.
Inui (Inui K.
et al., 1997, 1998) presented a formalization of probabilistic GLR (PGLR) parsing model which assigns a probability to each LR parsing action.
To shallow parsing, many researchers have made experiments with identification of noun phrases.
Abney (Abney S., 1991) used two level grammar rules to implement the noun phrase parsing through pure LR parsing algorithm.
Some new methods based on GLR algorithm aim to capture action probabilities by statistics distribution and context relations.
This paper combines rule approach and statistics approach simultaneously.
Furthermore, based on GLR and PCFG, we present an extended GLR parsing and a new grammar PCFG* that provides the action probabilities to prune the meaningless branches in the parsing table.
Our experiments are also made in two parts: Chinese base noun phrase parsing and Chinese full parsing.
The former is a simplified formalization of full parsing and is relatively simpler than the latter.
This paper includes four sections.
Section 2 presents a brief description of rule structure system-PCFG*.
Section 3 gives our extended GLR parsing algorithm and the parsing processing.
Section 4 shows the experiment results of our parser including Chinese base noun phrases (baseNP) identification and Chinese full syntactic parser.
The conclusions are drawn in section 5.
2. A New Grammar (PCFG*) and the Rule Structure Grammar system is one of the important pars of a parsing system.
We explain it in detail in the following section.
2.1 Structure
of Rules The definition of symbols in our system inherits the classifications of Penn Chinese tree-bank (Xia F., 2000).
There are totally 33

