Fertilization of Case Frame Dictionary for Robust Japanese Case Analysis Daisuke Kawaharay and Sadao Kurohashiyz yGraduate School of Information Science and Technology, University of Tokyo zPRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST) fkawahara,kurog@kc.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Abstract This paper proposes a method of fertilizing a Japanese case frame dictionary to handle complicated expressions: double nominative sentences, non-gapping relation of relative clauses, and case change.
Our method is divided into two stages.
In the first stage, we parse a large corpus and construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically from the parse results.
In the second stage, we apply case analysis to the large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame dictionary, and upgrade the case frame dictionary by incorporating newly acquired information.
1 Introduction
To understand a text, it is necessary to find out relations between words in the text.
What is required to do so is a case frame dictionary.
It describes what kinds of cases each verb has and what kinds of nouns can fill a case slot.
Since these relations have millions of combinations, it is difficult to construct a case frame dictionary by hand.
We proposed a method to construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically by arranging large volumes of parse results by coupling a verb and its closest case component (Kawahara and Kurohashi, 2001).
This case frame dictionary, however, could not handle complicated expressions: double nominative sentences, non-gapping relation of relative clauses, and case change.
This paper proposes a method of fertilizing the case frame dictionary to handle these complicated expressions.
We take an iterative method which consists of two stages.
This means gradual learning of what is understood by an analyzer in each stage.
In the first stage, we parse a large raw corpus and construct a Japanese case frame dictionary automatically from the parse results.
This is the method proposed by (Kawahara and Kurohashi, 2001).
In the second stage, we apply case analysis to the large corpus utilizing the constructed case frame dictionary, and upgrade the case frame dictionary by incorporating newly acquired information.
We conducted a case analysis experiment with the upgraded case frame dictionary, and its evaluation showed effectiveness of the fertilization process.
2 Japanese
Grammar We introduce Japanese grammar briefly in this section.
Japanese is a head-final language.
Word order does not play a case-marking role.
Instead, postpositions function as case markers (CMs).
The basic structure of a Japanese sentence is as follows: (1) kare he ga nom-CM hon book wo acc-CM kaku write (he writes a book) ga and wo are postpositions which mean nominative and accusative, respectively.
kare ga and hon wo are case components, and kaku is a verb1.
There are two phenomena that case markers are hidden.
A modifying clause is left to the modified noun in Japanese.
In this paper, we call a noun modified by a clause clausal modifiee.
A clausal modifiee is usually a case component for the verb of the modifying clause.
There is, however, no case marker for their relation.
1In this paper, we call verbs, adjectives, and noun+copulas as verbs for convenience.
(2) hon book wo acc-CM kaita write hito person (the person who wrote the book) (3) kare he ga nom-CM kaita write hon book (a book which he wrote) In (2), hito ‘person’ has ga ‘nominative’ relation to kaita ‘write’.
In (3), hon ‘book’ has wo ‘accusative’ relation to kaita ‘write’.
There are some non case-marking postpositions, such as wa and mo.
They topicalize or emphasize noun phrases.
We call them topic markers (TMs) and a phrase followed by one of them TM phrase.
(4) kare he wa TM hon book wo acc-CM kaita write (he wrote a book) (5) kare he ga nom-CM hon book mo TM kaita write (he wrote a book also) In (4), wa is interpreted as ga ‘nominative’.
In (5), mo is interpreted as wo ‘accusative’.
3 Construction
of the initial case frame dictionary This section describes how to construct the initial case frame dictionary.
This is the first stage of our two-stage approach, and is performed by the method proposed by (Kawahara and Kurohashi, 2001).
In the rest of this section, we describe this approach in detail.
The biggest problem in automatic case frame construction is verb sense ambiguity.
Verbs which have different meanings should have different case frames, but it is hard to disambiguate verb senses very precisely.
To deal with this problem, we distinguish predicateargument examples, which are collected from a large corpus, by coupling a verb and its closest case component.
That is, examples are not distinguished by verbs such as naru ‘make/become’ and tsumu ‘load/accumulate’, but by couples such as “tomodachi ni naru” ‘make a friend’, “byouki ni naru” ‘become sick’, “nimotsu wo tsumu” ‘load baggage’, and “keiken wo tsumu” ‘accumulate experience’.
This process makes separate case frames which have almost the same meaning or usage.
For example, “nimotsu wo tsumu” ‘load baggage’ and “busshi wo tsumu” ‘load supply’ are separate case frames.
To merge these similar case frames and increase coverage of the case frame, we cluster the case frames.
We employ the following procedure for the automatic case frame construction: 1.
A large raw corpus is parsed by a Japanese parser, and reliable predicate-argument examples are extracted from the parse results.
Nouns with a TM such as wa or mo and clausal modifiees are discarded, because their case markers cannot be understood by syntactic analysis.
2. The extracted examples are bundled accordingtotheverbanditsclosestcasecomponent, making initial case frames.
3. The initial case frames are clustered using a similarity measure, resulting in the final case frames.
The similarity is calculated by using NTT thesaurus.
We constructed a case frame dictionary from newspaper articles of 20 years (about 20,000,000 sentences).
4 Target
expressions The following expressions could not be handled with the initial case frame dictionary shown in section 3, because of lack of information in the case frame.
Non-gapping relation This is the case in which the clausal modifiee is not a case component of the verb in the modifying clause, but is semantically associated with the clause.
(6) kare ga he syudoken wo initiative nigiru have kaigi meeting (the meeting in which he has the initiative) In this example, kaigi ‘meeting’ is not a case component of nigiru ‘have’, and there is no case relation between kaigi and nigiru.
We call this relation non-gapping relation.
Double nominative sentence This is the case in which the verb has two nominatives in sentences such as the following.
(7) kuruma car wa TM engine ga engine yoi good (the engine of the car is good) In this example, wa plays a role of nominative, so yoi ‘good’ subcategorizes two nominatives: kuruma ‘car’ and engine.
We call this outer nominative outer ga and this sentence double nominative sentence.
Case change In Japanese, to express the same meaning, we can use different case markers.
We call this phenomenon case change.
(8) Tom ga Tom Mary Mary no of shiji wo support eta derive (Tom derived his support from Mary) In this example, Mary has kara ‘from’ relation to eta ‘derive’.
In this paper, we handle case change related to no ‘of’, such as (no, kara).
The following is an example that outer nominative is related to no case.
(9) kuruma no car engine ga engine yoi good (the engine of the car is good) The outer nominative of (7) can be nominal modifier of the inner nominative like this example.
This is case change of (no, outer ga).
There is a different case from the above that an NP with no modifying a case component does not have a case relation to the verb.
(10) kare ga he kaigi no meeting syudoken wo initiative nigiru have (he has the initiative in the meeting) In this example, kaigi ‘meeting’ has a no relation to syudoken ‘initiative’, but does not have a case relation to nigiru ‘have’.
This example is a transformation of (6), and includes case change of (no, non-gapping).
5 Fertilization
of case frame dictionary We construct a fertilized case frame dictionary from the initial case frame dictionary shown in section 3, to handle the complicated expressions described in section 4.
We apply case analysis to a large corpus using the dictionary, collect information which could not be acquired by a mere parsing, and upgrade the case frame dictionary.
The procedure is as follows (figure 1): 1.
The initial case frames are acquired by the method shown in section 3.
2. Case analysis utilizing the case frames acquired in phase 1 is applied to a large corpus, and examples of outer nominative are collected from case analysis results.
3. Case analysis utilizing the case frames acquired in phase 2 is applied to the large corpus, and examples of non-gapping relation are collected similarly.
4. Case similarities are judged to handle case change.
5.1 Case
analysis based on the initial case frame dictionary Case analysis of TM phrases and clausal modifiees is indebted to a case frame dictionary.
This section describes an example of case analysis utilizing the initial case frame dictionary.
(11) sono that hon book wa TM kare ga he tosyokan library de in yonda read (he read that book in the library) Case analysis of this example chooses the following case frame “tosyokan de yonda” ‘read in the library’ (“*” in the case frame means the closest CM.).
CM examples input read nom person, child, ¢¢¢ he acc book, paper, ¢¢¢ book loc* library, house, ¢¢¢ library kare ‘he’ and tosyokan ‘library’ correspond to nominative and locative, respectively, according to the surface cases.
The case marker of TM phrase “hon wa” ‘book (TM)’ cannot be understood by the surface case, but it is interpreted as wo ‘accusative’ because of the matching between “hon wa” ‘book (TM)’ and the accusative case slot of the case frame (underlined in the case frame).
gano fueru consumer bank company } outer ga } corporation bank Japan { } effect result profit}{ (1) case frames based on parsing (2) collection of outer nominative (3) collection of non-gapping relation (4) case similarity judgement Figure 1: Outline of our method 5.2 Collecting examples of outer nominative In the initial case frame construction described in section 3, the TM phrase was discarded, because its case marker could not be understood by parsing.
In the example (7), “engine ga yoi” ‘the engine is good’ is used to build the initial case frame, but the TM phrase “kuruma wa” ‘the car’ is not used.
Case analysis based on the initial case frame dictionary tells a case of a TM phrase.
Correspondencetoouternominativecannotbeunderstood by the case slot matching, but indirectly.
If the TM cannot correspond to any case slots of the initial case frame, the TM can be regarded as outer nominative.
For example, in the case of (7), since the case frame of “engine ga yoi” ‘the engine is good’ has only nominative which corresponds to “engine”, the TM of “kuruma wa” cannot correspond to any case slots and is recognized as outer nominative.
On the other hand, in the case of (11), the TM of hon wa is recognized as accusative, because hon ‘book’ is similar to the examples of the accusative slot.
We can distinguish and collect outer nominative examples in this way.
We apply the following procedure to each sentence which has both a TM and ga.
To reduce the influence of parsing errors, the collection process of these sentences is done under the condition that a TM phrase has no candidates of its modifying head without its verb.
1. We apply case analysis to a verb which is a head of a TM phrase.
If the verb does not have the closest case component and cannot select a case frame, we quit processing this sentence and proceed to the next sentence.
In this phase, the TM phrase is not made correspondence with a case of the selected case frame.
2. If the case frame does not have any cases which have no correspondence with the case components in the input, the TM cannot correspond to any case slots and is regarded as outer nominative.
This TM phrase is added to outer nominative examples of the case frame.
The following is an example of this process.
(12) nagai long sumo sumo wa TM ashi-koshi ni legs and loins futan ga burden kakaru impose (long sumo imposes a burden on legs and loins) Case analysis of this example chooses the following case frame “futan ga kakaru” ‘impose a burden’.
CM examples input impose nom* burden burdendat heart, legs, loins, ¢¢¢ legs and loins futan ‘burden’ and ashi-koshi ‘legs and loins’ correspond to nominative and dative of the case frame, respectively, and sumo corresponds to no case marker.
Accordingly, the TM of “sumo wa” is recognized as outer nominative, and sumo is added to outer nominative examples of the case frame “futan ga kakaru”.
This process made outer nominative of 15,302 case frames (of 597 verbs).
5.3 Collecting
examples of non-gapping relation Examples of non-gapping relation can be collected in a similar way to outer nominative.
When a clausal modifiee has non-gapping relation, it should not be similar to any examples of any cases in the case frame, because the constructed case frames have examples of only casesexceptfornon-gappingrelation.
Fromthis point of view, we apply the following procedure to each example sentence which contains a modifying clause.
To reduce the influence of parsing errors, the collection process of example sentences is done under the condition that a verb in a clause has no candidates of its modifying head without its clausal modifiee (“¢¢¢ [modifying verb] N1 no N2” is not collected).
1. We apply case analysis to a verb which is contained by a modifying clause.
If the verb does not have the closest case componentandcannotselectacaseframe, wequit processing this sentence and proceed to the next sentence.
In this phase, the clausal modifiee is not made correspondence with a case of the selected case frame.
2. If the similarity between the clausal modifiee and examples of any cases which have no correspondence with input case components does not exceed a threshold, this clausal modifiee is added to examples of non-gapping relation in the case frame.
We set the threshold 0.3 empirically.
The following is an example of this process.
(13) gyomu business wo itonamu carry on menkyo license wo syutoku-shita get (` got a license to carry on business) Case analysis of this example chooses the followingcaseframe“fgyomu, businessgwo itonamu” ‘carry on f work, business g’.
CM examples input carry on nom bank, company, ¢¢¢ -acc* work, business business Nominative of this case frame has no correspondence with a case component of the input, so the clausal modifiee, menkyo ‘license’, is checked whether it can correspond to nominative case examples.
In this case, the similarity between menkyo ‘license’ and examples of nominative is not so high.
Consequently, the relation of menkyo ‘license’ is recognized as nongapping relation, and menkyo is added to examples of non-gapping relation in the case frame “fgyomu, businessg wo itonamu”.
(14) ihouni illegally denwa telephone gyomu business wo itonande-ita carry on utagai suspect (suspect that ` carried on telephone business illegally) In this case, the above case frame is also selected.
Since utagai ‘suspect’ is not similar to the nominative case examples, it is added to case examples of non-gapping relation in the case frame.
This process made non-gapping relation of 23,094 case frames (of 637 verbs).
Collecting examples of non-gapping relation for all the case frames Non-gapping relation words which have wide distribution over verbs can be considered to have non-gapping relation for all the verbs or case frames.
We add these words to examples of non-gapping relation of all the case frames.
For example, 5 verbs have menkyo ‘license’ (example (13)) in their non-gapping relation, and 381 verbs have utagai ‘suspect’ (example (14)).
We, consequently, judge utagai has non-gapping relation for all the case frames.
We call such a word global non-gapping word.
We treated words which have non-gapping relation for more than 100 verbs as global nongapping words.
We acquired 128 global nongapping words, and the following is the examples of them (in English).
possibility, necessity, result, course, case, thought, schedule, outlook, plan, chance, ¢¢¢

