A Multiple-Document Summarization System with User Interaction Hiroyuki SAKAI Toyohashi University of Technology 1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tempaku, Toyohashi 441-8580, Japan, sakai@smlab.tutkie.tut.ac.jp Shigeru MASUYAMA Toyohashi University of Technology 1-1 Hibarigaoka, Tempaku, Toyohashi 441-8580, Japan, masuyama@tutkie.tut.ac.jp Abstract We propose a multiple-document summarization system with user interaction.
Our system extracts keywords from sets of documents to be summarized and shows the keywords to a user on the screen.
Among them, the user selects some keywords reflecting his/her needs.
Our system controls the produced summary by using these selected keywords.
For evaluation of our method, we participated in TSC3 of NTCIR4 workshop by letting our system select 12 best keywords regarding scoring by the system.
Our participated system attained the best performance in content evaluation among systems not using sets of questions.
Moreover, we evaluated effectiveness of user interaction in our system.
With user interaction, our system attained both higher coverage and precision than that without user interaction.
1 Introduction
Recent rapid progress of computer and communication technologies enabled us to access enormous amount of machine-readable information easily.
However, this has caused the information overload problem.
In order to solve this problem, automatic summarization methods have been studied (Mani and T.Maybury, 1999).
In particular, the necessity for a multiple-document summarization has been increasing and the multiple-document summarization technology has been intensively studied recently (Mani, 2001).
In this paper, we define multiple-document summarization as a process for producing a summary from a relevant document set.
Such a document set may be very large and may contain a number of topics.
It is preferable that a summary produced by a multiple-document summarization system from the document set covers all topics contained in the document set.
However, it is difficult to produce a summary that covers all the topics in the document set withasmallnumberofcharacters.
Forexample, a document set relevant to “releasing AIBO” contains some topics, e.g., what is AIBO?, how to sell AIBO?, etc.
Moreover, sentences recognized as important sentences considerably differ person to person (Nomoto and Matsumoto, 2001).
This is because “summarization need”, i.e., topics a different person wants to read, may differ.
Hence, we propose a multiple-document summarization system with user interaction for coping appropriately with user’s summarization need.
Oursystemextractskeywordsfromadocument set to be summarized and shows the keywords to a user.
Among them, the user selects keywords reflecting user’s summarization need.
Our system controls a produced summary by using the keywords selected by the user.
For realizing our purpose, we have devised a scoring method for keywords extraction specialized to our purpose.
We would like to emphasize here the fact that scoring of words for extracting keywords shown to a user is crucial for the system performance as well as different from those used in usual automatic indexing.
We participated in TSC3 (Text Summarization Challenge 3) of NTCIR4 workshop 1 and attained the best performance in content evaluation among systems not using sets of questions.
Note that our system participated in TSC3 is an automatic summarization system without user interaction by letting our system with user interactionselect12bestkeywordsregardingscoring by the system.
Moreover, we evaluated effectivenessofuserinteractionandthatwithuser interaction attained both higher coverage and precision than that without user interaction.
2 Feature
of our multiple-document summarization system Our multiple-document summarization system proposed in this paper is different from previ1http://www.lr.pi.titech.ac.jp/tsc/index-en.html

