A Computational Model of Incremental Utterance Production in Task-Oriented Dialogues Kohji Dohsaka NTT Basic Research Laboratories 3-1 Morinosato-wakamiya, Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-01 Japan dohsaka@at om.
brl. ntt.
j p Akira Shimazu NTT Basic Research Laboratories 3-1 Morinosato-wakamiya, Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-01 Japan shimazu@at om.
brl. ntt.
jp Abstract This paper presents a comtmtational model of incremental utterance production in task-oriented dialogues.
This model incrementally produces utterantes to propose the solution of a given problem, while simultaneously solving the problem in a stepwise manner.
Even when the solution has been partially determined, this model starts utterances to satisfy time constraints where pauses in mid-utterance must not exceed a certain length.
The results of an analysis of discourse structure in a dialogue corpus are presented and the fine structure of discourse that contributes to the incremental strategy of utterance production is described.
This model utilizes such a discourse structure to incrementally produce utterances constituting a discourse.
Pragmatic constraints are exploited to guarantee the relevance of discourses, which are evaluated by an utterance simulation experiment.
1 Introduction
Dialogues occur in real-time and so are susceptible to time constraints.
For example, dialogue participants must produce utterances under time constraints where pauses in mid-utterance must not exceed a certain length.
Moreover, participants are inference-limited (Walker and Rainbow 1994).
Due to time constraints and limits in ilfference, dialogue participants cannot help producing utterances incrementally.
Incremental utterance production is characterized like this: speakers produce utterances while deliberating what to say~ and refine what they will say while articulating the first part of their utterances.
The incremental strategy of utterance production plays a crucial role in spoken dialogues in two respects.
First, it helps speakers to satisfy time constraints on pauses.
This is crucial since lengthy pauses imply the transition of a turn from the current speaker to others.
Second, it helps hearers to easily understand utterances since it enables the piecemeal transmission of information.
This paper presents a computational model of incremental utterance production in task-oriented dialogues.
This model produces utterances to propose the solution of a given problem while simultaneously solving the problem in a stepwise manner.
To satisfy time constraints on pauses, this model starts utterances even when the solution has not been fully determined and refines on the solution during the articulation of utterances.
We present the results of an analysis of discourse structure in a corpus of Japanese taskoriented dialogues and show that the fine structure of discourse prevails in spoken dialogues and the predominant discourse structure contributes to the incrementM strategy.
Based on such a discourse structure, this model incrementally produces utterances constituting a discourse.
However, the incremental strategy is subject to generating irrelevant discourses.
To guarantee the relevance of discourses, this model utilizes pragmatic constraints and a context model, which are evaluated in an utterance simulation experiment.
2 Related
Research Recent studies of human speech production (Levelt 1989) show that human speakers frequetatly use the incremental strategy of utterance production.
This paper is concerned with a computational model of incremental utterance production.
Computational models for the incremental syntactic formulation of a sentence were proposed (Kempen and HoenKamp 1987; De Smedt and Kempen 1991).
Although incremental syntactic formulation is an important issue, we do not address this here.
POPEL is a parallel and incremental natural language generation system (Finkler and Schauder 1992; Reithinger 1992).
In POPEL, the "what to say" component determines the content to be generated and gradually carries it over to the "how to say" component, which formulates a sentence incrementally.
POPEL can generate dis304 (1).
aiko-ishida made desune / (2) itte/ <hai> PN to COl'ULA go (to The iiko-ishida station) (go) (3) sokode basu nandesuga / ~to then bus COI'ULA FIId,I,;I( (then b.s) (ullm) (d) morinosato-aoyama-ikitoiu <hal> basu ga PN nametI btls SuII.I am-node / exist-CAUSAl, (as there is a Ires itamed morinosato-aoyama-iki) (5) sore ni notte-moratte / <hal> it OBJ gc't on (get ()it it) (Note: <hal> shows that the dialogue partner inserts an utterance to provide acknowledgnmnt).
Figure 1: Part of transcription of dialogue courses using eontextuM information, tlowever, it d(les not allow for the line structure ()f discourse prevailing in st)oken diMogues.
We l)resent a eomlmtational model of incremental utterance l)roduetion using the line structure of discourse.
Carletta, Caley, and Isard (1993) proi)osed an architecture for time-constrained la.nguage production.
As for phenomena peculiar to st)oken dialogues, they focused on tlesil;¢Ltion an(l self-tel)air.
Although our model ca,n 1)roduce filler terms and repair prior utterances, our chief concern is the tine structure of spoken discourse, which is closely related to incremental utterance pro(tnction.
3 Discourse
Structure Analysis We analyzed the discourse structure in a corpus of task-oriented diah)gues, which were collected by the folh)wing method.
The subjects were ninety native Japaimse.
In each diah)gue, two subjects, N and E, were ~Lsked to converse by telephone to lind a solution to the l)roblem of how N could get from one place to another.
Subjects were chosen such that E had enough knowledge to solve the problem but N did not.
Eigilty dialogues were recorded and transcribed.
Fifteen dialogues were randomly chosen for analysis.
The discourse structure was analyzed in terms of information units and discourse relations.
a.1 Analyzing information units Speakers organize tile information to t)e conveyed to information units (Halliday 1994), which are the units for traitsmission of information.
The information units (IKs for short) are regarded as minilnal components of discourse structure.
We assume that IUs a,re realized by grammatical lievices: a clause realizes an 1 U, an inteljectory word realizes an 1U, and a tiller term shows the end of an IU.
Figure 1 shows pa.rt of the transcription of a dialogue where a diahlgue participant prol)oses a domMn l)lan.
Tile symbol "/" separates the IUs.
Table 1: Frequency distribution for information units Clause 929 Interjectory word 665 PP or NP 279 Conjun(:tion 84 Sequence of PPs or NPs 41 Others 14 Total 2012 Tal)le 1 shows the frequency distribution for tim /~ramnlatiea\] (:ategoric's of IU, where NP and I'P mean noun 1)hrase and 1)ostl)ositional phrase.
'.\['he average nmnber of NPs in an IU as a clause, NP, Pl', or sequen(-e of NPs and Pl?s is 1.01 in the tifteen dialogues.
The vm'ianee is 0.28.
This reslflt indicates that small IUs are frequently used.
For example, althougil IU (1) in Figure 1 descril)es only a part of a domain action, it is regarded as ail IU siil.ce it has a e(/pula ("desu") an(1 a sentenee-linal t)article ("ne").
3.2 Analyzing
discourse relations Discourse relations between adjacent discourse segments w(,.re examined.
A (liscourse segment is an IU or a sequence of IUs.
For discourse reta.tions, we here adot)ted those used in Rhetori(:al Structure Theory (M~nn and Thomt)son 1988) and tlere followed Hovy (1993) to classify them into semantic and interpersonal ones.
Figure 2 shows discourse relations tllat appear in the discourse displayed in Figure 1.
The small IUs are hierarchically related.
This results ill the fine structure of diseom:se.
Table 2 shows tile frequency distributions for discourse relations in tile fifteen diak)gues.
Let us consider the role that tile l)redominant relations, Elaboration, Circumstance, and Motivation, l)lay in tile inereinental strategy of utterance t)roduction.* First, Elaboration is exploited to describe domain actions, states or objects in a piecemeal fashion.
Elaboration enables speakers to distribute the content to be conveyed among different lUs.
'_Ptfis relation is useful for the incremental strategy since it allows speakers to begin uttering even when the content has not been fully determined.
Second, Circumstance is the relation between two segments, a nucleus and a satellite.
The m> eleus describes a domain action or state.
The satellite describes the circumstances where the m> cleus is interpreted, such as the preconditions of a domain action.
There are 41 cases where the satellite describes a precondition of a domain action, which amounts to 68% of all cases.
The constituents of a domain action are often referred to in its preconditions.
We see ~ typical ease in tile relation l)etween (4) and (5) in Figure 1.
(5) describes the action of getting on a bus and (4) de1We found no direct reh~tionship between Sequence and the increme.nt~d strategy.
305 Sequence / Circumstance, Motivation / Elaboration Elaboration (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) Figure 2: Discourse relations in Figure 1 Table 2: Distribution for discourse relations Elaboration 305 Sequence 74 Cirucumstance 60 Result 25 Condition 25 Purpose 2 Contrast 1 (a) Semantic relations Motivation \[i l Background Evidence Interpretation Concession Enablement (b) Interpersonal relations scribes the existentional status of the bus ms the precondition of the action.
By utilizing this relation, speakers can distribute the content of a domain action between two IUs.
They can pick up a constituent of an action and describe it before describing the whole content of the action.
Thus Circumstance is useful for the incremental strategy.
Finally, Motivation is mainly used for describing a domain action as a nucleus and motivating addressees to adopt the action by presenting a fact as a satellite.
In typical cases, speakers motivate addressees to adopt an action by asserting that its precondition is satisfied.
In such cases, Motivation occurs together with Circumstance and contributes to the incrementa.1 strategy in the same way as Circumstance.
4 The
Model As shown in Figure 3, this model is composed of five modules: a problem solver, an utterance planner, an utterance controller, a text-to-speech converter, and a pause monitor.
The problem solver makes domain plans that solve a given problem.
The utterance planner makes utterance plans to propose domain plans.
Pragmatic constraints and a context model are used to generate relevant discourses.
According to utterance plans, the utterance controller sends linguistic expressions to tile text-to-speech converter.
The pause monitor watches the length of pauses and signals the utterance planner and controller when the pause length exceeds a given length.
These modules work in parallel.
Both domain plans and utterance plans are made in a stepwise manner using the hierarchical planning mechanism (Russel and Norvig 1995: Chap.12).
This model starts to make an utterance plan before a fully determined domain plan has been obtained.
When a pause exceeds the time limit, the utterance planner sends the utterance controller an utInput: a domain problem Parallel Modules / \[ ProlflcnlSolvcr \] \[~f Pragmatic ~'~ k,, ConstraintsJ domain plans ~../"\] \[Utterance Planner \]i Context Model utterance plans Utterance Controller expressions Output: utterances Figure 3: Model overview terence plan obtained within the time limit.
A domain plan is refined during the planning and articulaton of utterances.
Based on a refined domain plan, the utterance plan is replanned.
When the utterance controller is not given utterance plans within the time limit, it produces a filler term.
5 Pragmatic
Constraints Pragmatic constraints are required to guarantee the relewmce of discourses.
This model exploits the following pragmatic constraints.
(cl) Avoid conveying redundant information.
((:2) Pronominalize objects in the focus of attention (Grosz and Sidner 1986).
(c3) Be relevant according to the attentionM state.
?\['he context model records the information that has been conveyed and tracks the attentional state.
For example, consider the domain action of moving from one location 11 to another 12.
To describe such a domain action with verbs such as "iku(go)", It must be in focus.
Otherwise, the description is irrelevant.
After such an action has been described, 12 is in the focus.
Moreover, any object marked as a topic becomes a focused one.
6 Problem
Solving We outline the problem solver using a sample problem of how to move from the Musashino Center to the Atsugi Center on the map in Figure 4.
Tile problem solver first makes an abstract domain plan, which is a sequence of three actions el, a2, and a3 : moving from the Musashino Center to the nearest station by bus, moving to the station nearest the Atsugi Center, and then moving to the Atsugi Center by bus.
This plan is written as (rl).
The contents of these actions are written as (r2).
Expression cont(X, Y) means that the content of X is represented as a set Yof literals.
(rl) plan(\[el, a2, a3\]) (r2) cont(al, {type(el, move), source(el, xl), manner(el, x2), dest(al, x3)}) cont(xl, {type(M, building), named(xl, "musashino senta~")}) eont(x2, {type(x2, bus)}) 306 Musashino Center Mitaka KichijojiW""~ ...~hinjuku j.~-Shimokitazawa /x "Zo0a uL4 Atsugi Center Figure 4: Sample map cont(x3, {type(x3, station), nearest(x3, xl)}) cont(a2, {type(a2, move), source(a2, x3), dest(a2, x4)}) cont(aa, {type(a3, inove), source(a3, x4), m n.er(a3, xS), de t(a3, x6)}) cont(x4, {type(x4, station), nemest(x4, x6)}) cont(x5, {type(x5, bus)}) cont(x6, {tytte(x6, building), named(x6, "atsugi sentaa") }) The problem solver tries to make a more concrete plan.
When more tha,n one domain 1)lan is possible, it chooses tile domain i)lan that requires the shortest execution time.
In this domain, the domain plan is a sequence of actions a/t, a5, a6 and aT: moving from the Musashino Center to Kichijoji station by bus, moving to Shimokitazawa station by tile Inokashira IAne, moving to Aiko-ishida station by the Odakyu Line, ~md then moving to the Atsugi Center by bus.
Part of the content of this plan is represented as follows.
(r3) phm(\[a4, a5, a6, a71) (r4) cont(a4, {type(M, move), source(a4, xl), manner(a4, x2), dest(a4, x7)}) cont(xT, {type(xT, station), named(x7, "kichijoji" )}) ...... 7 Utterance Planning An utterance plan is a sequence of colnmnnieative actions that achieves a communicative goal.
It is refined in a stepwise manner.
A sequence of surface communicative actions corresponding to the uttering of linguistic ext)ressions is finally planned.
7.1 Communicative
goals Generation systems engaging in dialogues must record communicative goals related to communicative actions (Moore and Paris 1994).
Communicative goals used here are: • persuaded-plan(P): dialogue partner is pershaded to adopt dommn plan P.
• persuaded-act(A): dialogue partner is persuaded to adopt domain action A.
• described-event(E, C, At): domain event E is described as an event having content C an(t attitude At toward E is also described.
• dc.scribed-obj(O, 6): domain object O is described ~s an object having content C.
• dcscribcd-them.a-rel(l?~, O, E): thematic relation It is described, which domain object O bears to domain event E.
When the domain t)lan (rl) is obtained, (r5) is given as the initiM communicative goal.
(1"5) persuadeA-plan(\[al, a2, a3\]) 7.2 Surface coinmunicative actions Sllrfa(;e commnnicativ(, actions used here are: • sv.rfacc-desc-cvent(E, C, At): utter expressions tO descrit)e, domain event E iLq all event having content C and des(-ribe attitude At toward E.
• surface-desc-obj(O, C, It): utter expressions to describe doinain object O as an object having content C and bearing thenmtic relation R to a certain event.
7.3 Planning
utterances based on tile fine structure of discourse An utterance pbm is elaborated using action schemata and decomposition methods.
An action schema consists of an action description, applicability constraints and an effe(:t.
2 It
defines a communicative action.
A decomposition inetho(l consists of an action description, applieal)ility constraints and a plan.
It specifies how an action is decolnposed to a detailed phm.
The following schema (r6) defines the communic;ttive action of proI)osing a domain plan by using Sequence.
The decomposition method (rT) specifies how the ~mtion is decomposed to a sequence of finer actions.
:~ (1"6) Aet(propose-acts-in-seq( * P), Constr: plan( . P), Effect: persuaded-plan( * P) ) (r7) Decomp(propose-acts-in-seq(\[*Act l *Rest\]), Constr: *Rest ¢ \[\], Plan: \[aehieve(persuaded-aet( * Act ) ), propose-acts-in-scq( * Rest ) \] ) In these representations, achieve(P) designates an action that achieves goal P.
Notation \[H I L\] specifies a list, where H is the head of the list and L is the rest.
Symbols starting with "*" represent variables.
By applying (r6) and (r7) to the initial communicative goal (rS), the following utterance plan is obtained: (r8) achieve(pers,laded-act (al)), achieve(persuaded-act(a2)), achieve(persuaded-act(a3)).
2In this paper, we do not consider a precondition for an action schema.
aWe have omitted other method to avoid intinite reeursive application of the method (r7).
307 (r9) Act(propose-act@A), Effect: persuadcd-act( * A ) ) (rl0) Decomp(proposc-act( * A ), Constr: cont(, A, *C), Plan: achicvc( dcscribcd-cvcnt(, A,,C, proposal)) (rl 1)Act(describc-cvcnt-by-elaboration(,E, *C, *At), Effect: described-cvcnt(, E, *C, *At)) (r12) Decomp( describc-event-by-elaboration(, E, *C, *At), Constr: * Thema E *CA *Thcma =..
\[*R, *E, *0\] A *R ¢ type A cont(*O,,ObjC) A *Rest = *C {*Thema} plan: \[ chi e( descr cd-obj(,O, *ObjC) ), *R, *0, *E) ), ach, ie e( d sc i ed-e e, t(, E,, Re t,, At ) ) \] ) (r13) Act( describe-obj-with-thcma( *O, *C, *R, *E), Effect: dcscribcd-obj( *O, *C)A described-thema-rcl(,R, *0, *E) ) (r14) Decoinp(dcscribe-obj-with-thcrna(,O, *C, *R, *E), Plan: surface-desc-obj(,O, *C, *R)) (r15) Act( dcscribc-cvcnt-type(,E, *C, *At), Constr: *C = {type(*E, *T)}, Effect: describcd-cvcnt(, E, *C, *At)) (r16) De~comp( describc-event-type(, E, *C, *At), Plan: surface-desc-event( * E, *C, *At)) Figure 5: Action schemata and decomposition methods for proposing domain action (r8) is decomposed by applying the action schemata and decomposition methods shown in Figure 5.
These schemata define communicative actions for proposing a domain action while elaborating the content of the action in a stepwise manner.
They reflect the results of a discourse structure analysis, which show that speakers tend to distribute the constituents of a domain action into different IUs by using EI,ABORATION.
In (r12), notation F(X, 17,)...
=.. \[F, X, Y,...\] is used for decomposing term F(X, Y,)... into relation F and arguments X, Y, ....
When domain objects are linguistically realized by the surfaee-desc-obj in (r14), pragmatic constraint (c2) is exploited to t)ronominalize focused objects.
In addition, according to constraint (c3), the objects that are not in focus need to be topiealized if they must be in focus.
By applying these schemata to the first action in (r8), the following utterance plan is obtained.
Thematic relations are chosen in default order when (r12) is applied.
(r17)surface-desc-obj(xl, {type(xl, building), named(x1, "mnsashino sentaa")}, source), surface-desc-obj(x2, {type(x2, bus)}, manner), surface-desc-obj(x3, {type(x3, station), nearest(xa, xl)}, dest), surface-desc-event(al, {type(a1, move)}, proposal).
According to utterance plan (r17), this model can start the following utterances to satisfy the time constraints before Obtaining a concrete domain plan such as (r3).
(ul)musashino sentaa kara-wa desune/ PN from-Topic COPULA (from the Musashino Center) basu de/ mo~ori-no-eki made/ ikimasu/ bus by nearest station to go (by bus) (to the nearest station) (go) For brevity, we have omitted action schemata and decomposition methods for utterance planning using MOTIVATION and CIRCUMSTANCE.
7.4 Replanning
utterance plans While planning and articulating utterances using an abstract domain plan, a more concrete domain plan is being made.
When a more concrete domain plan is obtained, an utterance plan is replanned.
For example, consider the case where a concrete domain plan, (r3), is obtained during the production of utterance (ul).
The following utterance plan is replanned: (r18) surface-desc-obj(xl, {type(x1, building), named(M, "nmsashino sentaa")}, source), surface-desc-obj (x2,{type(x2, bus)},manner), surface-desc-obj(x7, {type(x7, station), named(x7, "kichijoji")}, dest), surface-desc-event (a4, {type(a4, move) }, proposal).
We assume that plan (r18) is obtained when this model finishes uttering "moyori-no-eki made" in utterance (ul).
Then (ul) is interrupted and utterances follow based on (r18).
Consequently, the following utterances are produced: (u2)musashino sentaa kara-wa desune/ PN from-Toplc COPULA (from the Musashino Center) basu de/ moyori-no-eki made/ bus by nearest station to (by bus) (to the nearest station) kichijoji made desune / ikimasu / PN to COPULA go (to Kichijoji station) (go) In the above, the redundant information is not restated according to pragmatic constraint @1).
Self-repair occurs: "moyori-no-eki made" is replaced by "kichijoji made".
8 Experiments
This model has been implemented in Common Lisp.
A logical constraint unification systern (Nakano 1991) is used in the planners.
The domain planner includes 18 action schemata and 16 decomposition methods.
The utterance plan308 (el) Musashino sentaa kara-wa desune / PN front-Topic, COPULA (from the Musashino Center) (e2) ~to Kichijoji made / dete-kudasai / FILI,F,I~ PN to go-t)le~se (crm to Kichijoji station) (please go) @3) ~to desune sorekara inokashira-sen de FILLER then PN by (erm then by the Inokastfira Line) (e4) odakyu-sen hi/ norikaete / PN for change ((:hange train for the Odakyu Line) basu de / moyori-no-eki made / bus by nearest station to (by Ires) (to the nearest station) desune / shimokitazawa made / COI'UI,A PN to (to Shimokitazawa station) aiko-ishida made / ikimasu / .....
PN to go (to Aiko-ishida station) (go) Figure 6: Discourse generated by implemented system ner includes 16 action schemata and 16 decomposition methods.
We ewduated pragmatic constraints in an utterance simulation experiment, where discourses generate.d with the constraints were contpared with those generated without them.
A map including 120 h)cations such as station and 25 railroad lines w~s used.
The pause length limit was ().5 see.
When pragmatic constraints were used, this implemented systeIn generated relevant discourses.
Figure 6 shows the discourse generated when the problem of inoving frolIl the Mus~ksliino Center to the Atsugi Center was given.
Filler terms such as gto were produced to satisfy the time constraints.
Pragmatic constraint (el) was used ill (e2), ~Uq explained in section 7.4.
Constraint (c2) was used to zero-proImminalize stations in the focus of attention.
Constraint (e3) was used in ((:1) to topicalize the Musashino Center.
Topicalization was also used in other cases where the system must shift the focus of attention to the location already described in the preceding discourse.
Such cases happened when the system started utterantes based on an abstract domain I)lan, took a long time to obtain a more concrete plan, and then elaborated on a route from a location that was not in focus based on the concrete plan.
Without prt~gmatic constraints, the system generated irrelevant and excessively redundant discourses.
9 Conclusion
We presented a computational model of producing utterances incrementally so as not to make excessively long pauses.
We presented the results of an anMysis of discourse structure and showed that speakers frequently use small information units and exploit the fine structure of discourse that contributes to the increlnentM production strategy.
This model can utilize such a discourse structure to incrementally produce utterances according to pragmatic constraints.
These were ewduated by an utterance simulation experiment.
References Carletta, Jean; Caley, Richard; and Isard, Stephen.
itte / go (go) (1993).
A system architecture for simulating timeconstrained language production.
Research Paper ItCRC/RP-43, University of Edinburgh.
I)e Smedt, Koenraad, and Keinpen, Gerard.
(1991). Segment grammar: A fornmlism for incremental sentence generation, in Natural Language GeneTnlion in ArtiJieial Intelligence and Computational Linguistics.
Edited by Cdcile L.
Paris, William R.
Swartout, and William C.
Mann, Khlwer Academic Publishers, 329-349.
Finkler, ~Volfgang, and Schauder, Ann.
(1992). Effects of incrementM output on incrementM natural language generation, ht Proc.
of 10th ECAI, 505-507.
Grosz, Barbara J., and Sidner, Candace L.
(1986). Attention~ intentions~ and the structure of discourse.
Computational Linguistics, 12, 175-204.
lIalliday, M.
A. K.
(1994). An Introduction to l,'unclional Grammar.
Fdward Arnold.
\]lovy, F, duard II.
(\] 993).
Automated discourse generation using discourse structure relations.
Artificial Intelligence, 63, 34t-385.
Kempen, Gerard, and Iloenkamp, Edward.
(1987). An incremental procedural grammar for sentence formulation.
Cognitive Science, 11, 201-258.
Levelt, Willem J.
M. (1989).
Speaking: Prom Intentions to Articulation.
The MIT Press.
Mann, William C., and TholnI)son, Sandra A.
(1988). Rhetorical structure theory: Towards a functional theory of text organizatiou.
Text, 8(3), 243-281.
Moore, Johanna D., and Paris, Cdcile L.
(1994). Planning text for advisory dialogues: capturing intentional aim rhetorical information.
Computational Linguistics, 19(4), 651-694.
Nakano, Mikio.
(1991). Constraint projection: An ettlcient treatment of disjunctive feature descriptions.
In Proc.
of 29th ACL, 307-314.
Reithinger, Norbert.
(1992). The performance of an incrementM generation for multi-modM dialog contributions.
In Aspects of Automated Natural Language Generation.
Edited by Robert Dale, Elluard tlovy, l)ietmar RSsner, and Oliviero Stock, Springer-Verlag, 263-276.
Russel, Stuart, and Norvig, Peter.
(1995). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach.
Prentice IIall.
Walker, Marilyn A., and Rainbow, Owen.
(1994). The role of cognitive modeling in achieving communicative intentions.
In Proe.
of 7th International Conference on Natural Language Generation. 309

