A Method for Relating Multiple Newspaper Articles by Using 
Graphs, and Its Application to Webcasting 
Naohiko Uramoto and Koichi Takeda 
IBM t{('.search, Tokyo I{.csearch Laboraloory 
1623-14 Shimo-t:suruma, Yamato-shi, Kanagawa-ken 242 ,lapan 
{ u ramot o,t akeda } ((~.IM.i|)nl.(:o.j I) 
Abstract 
This I)at/er descri/)es methods for relating (thread
ing) multiple newspal)er articles, and for visualizing 
various characteristics of them by using a directed 
graph. A set of articles is represented by a set of 
word vectors, and the similarity between the vec
tors is then cah:ulated. The graph is constructed 
fl'om the similarity matrix. By applying some con
straints on the chronoh)gical ordering of articles, an 
e\[ficient threading algorithm that runs ill O(n) time 
(where n is the number of articles) is obtained. The 
constructed graph is visualized with words that rep
resent the topics of the threads, an(t words that rep
resent new informatioil in each article. The thread
ing te(:hnique is suitable for Webcasting (t)ush) ap
plications. A threading server determines relation
ships among articles fi'om wtrious news sources, and 
(:reates files containing their threading information. 
This information is represented in extended Marku 1) 
Language (XML), and can be visualized (m most 
Web browsers. The XML-t)ased representation and 
a current prototype are descrihed in this paper. 
1 Introduction

The vast (tuantity of information available tod~ U 
makes it difficult to search for and understand the 
information that we want. If there are nlany related 
documents about a topic, it is important to capture 
their relationships so that we can ot)tain a clearer 
overview. However, most information resources, in
cluding newspaImr articles do not haw.' explicit re
lationshiI)s, t'br examt)le, although documents on 
the Web are connected by hyperlinks, relationships 
cannot be specified. 
WebcCusting ("trash") apt)lications such as Point
cast i constitute a pronlising solution to tile prob
lem of information overloading, but the articles they 
provide do not have links, or else must be manually 
linked at a high cost in terms of time and eflbrt. 
This i)aper describes nlethods for relating news
paper articles automatically, and its at/plication for 
a Wellc~Lsting application. A set of article on a par
1 http://www.pointcast.com 
ticular topic is ordered chronologically, and the re
suits are re.t)resented as a directed graph. There are 
various ways of relating documents and visualizing 
their structure. For example, USENET articles can 
be accessed by nleans of newsreader software. In the 
system, a label (title) is attached to each posted mes
sltge, specifying whether it deals with a new topic or 
is a reply to a previous message. A chain of articles 
on a toI)ic is called a thread. In this case, tim rela
tionships between the articles are explicitly defined. 
This t)ost/rel)ly-t/ased apt)roach makes it t/ossible for 
a reader to group all the messages on a particular 
topic. IIowever, it is dif\[icult to capture tile story of 
the thread fl'om its thread structure, since aI)prot)ri
ate titles are not added to the messages. 
This lisper aims to t/rovide ways of relating mul
tit)le news articles and representing their structure 
in a way that is easy Io understand and comt)uta
tionally in(!xt)ensive. A set of relationshiI)s is (l(?tincd 
here as a directe(l graph. A node indicates an arti
cle, and an are fr(ml n(lde X to }~ indicates that the 
article X is followed by }" (or that X is adjacent to 
Y). An article contains both known and unknown 
(new) information. Known information consists of 
words shared I)y tile I)egilming and ending points of 
an arc. When node X is adjacent to Y, the words 
are represented by (X N Y). The known information 
is called genus words in this t)aper. Even if an artMe 
folhlws another one, it generally contains some new 
information. This information can tie represented 
I)y subtraction (Y X) (Damashek, 1995), and is 
called diffc.Tvntia words, by analogy with definition 
sentences in dictionaries, which contain genus words 
and diftierentia, in this pat)er , genus an(t diff(,.rentiac 
words are used to calculate the similarities between 
two articles, an(1 to visualize topics ill a set of arti
cles. 
Since artMes are ordered chronologically, there 
are some time constraints on the conne(:tivity of 
nodes. A graph is created l/y constructing an ad
jacency matrix for nodes, which in turn is created 
fi'om a similarity matrix for nodes. 
Some i)otential features of articles in a set (:an l)e 
(teternfined by analyzing some forInal ~st/ects of the 
1307 
d2 d3 
Oa5 _~0 a6 
Figure 1: Example of a Directed Graph G 
corresponding graph. For example, tile paths in the 
graph show the stories of the nodes they contain. 
Multiple paths for a node (article) show that there 
are multiple stories associated with it. Furthermore, 
if tile node has a long path, it is in the "main stream" 
of the topic represented by the graph. An efficient 
algorithm for finding such paths is described, later 
in the paper. 
Application of the threading method to docu
ments on the Web would be very useful because, al
though such documents are connected by hyperlinks, 
their relationships cannot be specified. In this paper, 
generated threads by this method are represented in 
eXtended Markup Language (XML) (XML, 1997), 
which is the proposed standard for exchange of in
formation on the Web. XML-based threads can be 
used by webcasting or push services, since various 
tools for parsing and visualizing threads are avail
able. 
In Section 2, a directed graph structure for arti
cles is defined, and the procedure for constructing a 
directed graph is described in Section 3. In Section 
4, some features of the created graph are discussed. 
Section 5 introduces a webcasting application by us
ing the threading technique, and Section 6 concludes 
the paper. 
2 Definition
of a Graph Structure 
A set of articles is represented as an ordered set V: 
V = {dl,d2,...,d,~}. 
The suffix sequence 1, 2,..., n represents the pas
sage of time. Article di is older than di+l. The order 
is obtained from the publication dates of the articles. 
Different time points arbitrarily are assigned to ar
ticles published on the same day. 
Related articles are represented as a directed 
graph (V,A). V is a set of nodes. A is a set of 
ordered pairs (i,j), where i and j are members of 
V. Figure 1 shows an example of a directed graph. 
In this case, the graph is represented as follows: 
V = {dl,d2,da,d4,ds,d6,d6,dT}, A = {(dl,d2), 
(d2, d3), (dl, d4), (d5, d6), (d2, dr), (d3, d8), (d7, d8)} 
The nodes are ordered chronologically. The fol
lowing constraint is introduced into the graph: 
M = 
dl 
d~ 0 
d.~ 0 
d3 0 
d4 0 
d5 0 
d6 0 
d7 0 
d8 0 
d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 ds 
1 0 1 0 0 0 0 
0 1 0 0 0 1 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Figure 3: Adjacency Matrix MG of G 
Constraint 1 
For(di,dj) E A, i < j 
Tile constraint simply shows that an old article 
cannot follow a new one. 
3 Creating
a Graph Structure for 
Articles 
This section describes how to construct a directed 
graph structure from a set of articles. Any directed 
graph can be represented by a matrix. Figure 3 
shows the adjacency matrix Ma of the graph G in 
Figure 1. 
For example, a value of "1" for the (1, 2) element 
in M indicates that dl is adjacent to d2. Since an 
article cannot follow itself, tile value of (i, i) elements 
is "0". From the time constraint defined in Section 
3, Ma is an upper triangle matrix. 
The following is a procedure for constructing a 
directed graph for related articles: 
1. Calculate the similarity and difference between 
articles. 
2. Construct a similarity matrix. 
3. Convert tile matrix into an adjacency matrix. 
In the next section, each step is illustrated by us
ing the set of articles V in Figure 2 on the subject 
of nuclear testing taken from the Nikkei Shinbun. 2 
3.1 Calculating
the similarities and 
differences between articles 
Tile function sim(di, dj) calculates the word-based 
similarity between two articles. It is defined on the 
basis of Salton's Vector Space Model (Salton, 1968). 
Words are extracted from an article by using a mor
phological analyzer. Next, nouns and verbs are ex
tracted as keywords. 
x-", dt dj 
sim(di, dj) = 2-.k~ WkwWkw 
d, 2 
2The articles were originally written in Japanese. 
1308 
dl: The prime minister of France says that it is necessary to restart nuclear testing. 
d2: The Defense Minister suggests restarting nuclear testing. 
da: At a summit conferei,ee, the Prime Minister will adopt a policy of requesting the French Government to 
halt nuclear testing. 
d4: China's latest nuclear test will hold up negotiations oil a treaty to abolish such testing. 
&,: The Minister of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Youhei Kohno, takes a critical attitude toward China, and asks 
France to understand Japan's position. 
d(;: The prime minister of New Zealand asks the French Govermnent not to restart nuclear testing. 
dr: President of France states that mmlear testing will restart in Septemt)er, and that France will conduct 
eight tests between now and next May. 
da: France states that it will restart nuclear testing. This will hamper nuclear dism'mament. 
d.,~: France states that it will restart nuclear testing. Australia halts defense cooperation with France. 
dl0: France states that it will restart nuclear testing. The (J.S. expresses regret at the decision. 
Figure 2: V: Articles about nuclear testing 
d, is the weight given to the keyword Here, Wkw 
kw in article di. Modification of tile TF.IDF 
vahm (Robertson et al., 1976) is used for the weight
ing. g a' is the weight assigned to tim keyword kw, kw 
which is a differentia word for di. 
j, Cd, (kw) k 
?t kw • log Nk ,t, C< ( kw ) " '&" ,t, f 1.5 kw C differentia(di) 
gk~,, = ~ 1 otherwise. 
Other parameters are defined as follows: 
k: constant value 
Cd, (kw): frequency of word kw in d(i) 
Cd,: number of words in d(i) 
Nk(kw): number of artMes that contain the word 
kw in k m'ticles di-k,..•, di 
The function diffcrentia(di) returns a set of key
words that at)pear in dj but (lo not at)pear in the 
last k articles. 
diffcrcntia(di) = {kw\[Cd,(kw) > O, and for all 
dl, 
where i k < l < i, Cd,(kw) = 0} 
a.2 Constructing a similarity matrix 
A similarity matrix for a set of articles is constructed 
t)y using the sire function. In a conventional hierar
chical clustering algorithm, a similarity for any con> 
bination of two articles is required in order to con
struct a hierarchical tree of the set of articles. This ~( .... 1) 
causes ~ calculations of the similarity func
tion, for n articles, with a consequent complexity 
of O(n2). This is very expensive when n is large• 
In our algorithm for constructing a similarity ma
trix, shown in Figure 4, the complexity of construct
ing a graph structure for an article set by using a 
constraint is O(n). The following constraint, which 
l)roeedure MakeI)istanceMatrix 
for i= 2 to n begin 
if i-k < lthens ÷1 elses ti-k 
forj = s toi1 begin 
a(i,j) ~sim(di,dj) 
j+-j+l 
end 
i+-i+l 
end 
Figure 4: Procedure for Constructing Sinfilarity Ma
trix 
includes Constraint 1, is used for in threading algo
rithm. 
Constraint 2 
For (di,dj) EA, j-(k+l) <i<j 
This constraint means that an artMe can only fol
low the last k artMes. As tile result, the ilulnbcr of 
times the similarity matrix needs to be cah:ulated is 
reduced by kn, giving a complexity of O(n). 
By using tile algorithm, each similarity between 
nodes is calculated, and the similarity matrix in Fig
ure 5 shows a similarity matrix S of V. Ill this case, 
keywords are extracted from title sentences, and k 
is set to five. 
a.a Conversion into an adjacency matrix 
From the similarity matrix, an adjacency matrix is 
constructed. An element s(i, j) in the similarity ina
trix corresponds to tile element ss(i,j) in the adja
cency matrix SS. There are various strategies for the 
conversion. In this paper, ss(i,j) is set to 1 when 
s(i, j) > 0.18, and any node can follow at most k/2 
nodes, in this case two nodes. Figure 6 shows a re
sult of the conversion. Finally, a directed graph for 
V is created (Figure 7). Figure 8 shows a graph that 
visualizes the content of the articles in our example. 
1309 
S = 
dl 
d2 
d3 
d4 
d5 
d6 
d7 
ds 
d9 
dlo 
dl d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 ds d9 dlo 
0 .309 .239 .072 .131 .319 0 0 0 0 
0 0 .159 .072 .131 .319 .197 0 0 0 
0 0 0 .056 .103 .498 .103 .124 0 0 
0 0 0 0 .186 .056 .046 .056 .046 0 
0 0 0 0 0 .102 .085 .102 .128 .096 
0 0 0 0 0 0 .154 .176 .206 .209 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .308 .320 .323 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .257 .279 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 .287 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Figure 5: Similarity Matrix S 
dl 
d2 
d3 
d4 
d5 
d6 
d7 
ds 
d9 
dlo 
dl d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 ds do dlo 
0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Figure 6: Adjacency Matrix SS Converted fiom S 
There are two threads in the graph. One concerns 
for France's restarting of nuclear testing. The other 
concerns China's latest nuclear test. The "France" 
thread contains two sub-threads. One concern re
quests by other countries for France to reconsider its 
stated intension of restarting nuclear testing, and the 
other concerns responses by other countries to the 
France government's official statement on testing. 
Some articles are followed by multiple articles. For 
example, d7 is the first official statement on France's 
restarting of nuclear testing, and many related arti
cles on this topic follow. 
Each rectangle in Figure 8 represents an article. 
Words in a rectangle are differentia words for the 
articles. These words show new information in the 
article, and make it easy to understand the content 
of the articles. If a word in an article appears in 
the differentia words for its parent article, the word 
may represent a "turning point" in the story of the 
articles. For example, the word "state" is the dif
ferentia word for dT, and is in its adjacent articles 
(t8, d9, anddm. This means that d7 is a starting point 
of the new topic "state." Such words are called topic 
words, and are represented in Figure 8 by bold type. 
Several features of the graph visualize the charac
d2 dl 0 <3 .d07~ 
d4 
o 
d8 
d9 
dlO 
Figure 7: Directed Graph G1 for V 
teristics and relationships of the articles: these fea
tures will be discussed in the next section. 
It is difficult to evaluate the result of threading. 
We are implementing it in a webcasting (push) ap
plication so that it can be evaluated by the many 
people who use ordinary web browsers. The attempt 
is described in Section 5. 
4 Features
of a Graph 
This section describes how the features of a con
structed graph represent the characteristics of arti
cles. 
4.1 In-degree and Out-degree 
The in-degree is the number of arcs leading to a node, 
while the out-degree is the number of arcs leading 
from it. The in-degree of di can be calculated by 
adding up the elements in the i-th column of an adja
cency matrix. The out-degree of di can be calculated 
by adding up the elements in the i-th row of the ma
trix (Figure 9). In Botafogo et al. (Botafogo et al., 
1992), a node that has a high out-degree is called an 
index node, while a node that has a high in-degree is 
called a reference node in their analysis of hypertext. 
In the set of articles V shown in Figure 9, d7 is an 
index node. In this paper, an index node denotes the 
beginning of a new topic. When the topic is impor
tant, many articles follow, and consequently the out
1310 
dl 
France restart 
nuclear testing 
d4 
China latest hold-up 
negotiation treaty 
d3 d6 
restart ~~ \[ha\].t _ New Zealand 
nuclear \] tesing~ d2 --'-'f~\] /'/'~/ 
~suggest ~-'-~ \] ~ef enc e_ M~lni~ t e1~ \] 
-~d7 d8 
President state Lsta~ hamper September conduc ~ di sarmlmeA_t 
\ \] defence . | 
0h,0a q 
Japan position \] 
Figure 8: Visualized Content for Gl 
f ~t.'J~ ~/4~~~~ \] The length of a t,ath shows how the nodes on it to tho ",tai. strea, n" of the story. For )utah1 J 1~~._~_1 ~__ 0\[O_~mt)le, the ,naximunt le.ngth of a path through d~3, is three, while that of a I)ath through dr is five.. This 
Figure 9: In-degree/Out-degree of the Graph Gt 
degree for the node increa.ses. The contril)ution of 
reference nodes is not clear in V (d~, ds, and d9 have 
max in-degrees). Nodes that have high in-degree 
have two characteristics. The first is that when the 
articles contain multiple topics, they have many in
bound arcs, each representing a different topic. The 
second is that when the articles are closely related 
for a particular topic, the in-degrees of related nodes 
increase, since these articles are connected to each 
other. 
4.2 Path

A path front one node to another node shows the 
"story flow" of articles. Multiple paths hetween 
two nodes show different stories about the nodes. 
For examt)le, there are three paths between dl, 
which is a iirst node, and dlo. The shortest path 
(dl, d2,, dr, dlo) gives a simple outline of the articles. 
The longest path (dl, d2, dr, ds, dg, din) contains all 
related information on the topic. By extracting long 
paths from the graph and coml)ining them, various 
stories can be created. 
means that a path that contains (I 7 is Oil a inain 
stream of the thread and is likely to be continued. 
The longest t)aths for nodes can be calculated by 
using the algorithm shown in Figure 11. Its con> 
plexity is O(n), since the maximmn numbe,' of arcs 
is at most ,tk for n nodes, from Constraint 2, defined 
in Section a.2. 
4.3 Cycle

A cycle 3 shows the existence of a topic. In V, 
{dr, ds, d9, dl0 } is a cycle for the topic "statement." 
By recognizing cycles, we can extract topics fl-om the. 
whole graph. Furthermore, we can abstract articles 
by reducing cycles to single nodes. 
5 XML-based Representation for 
Threads 
It is important that the threading information be ex
changeable when we apt)ly out" method to Web docu
ments. Extended Markup Language (XML) is a pro
posed standard (XML, 1997) specified by the World 
Wide Web Consortimn (W3C). In XML, tags and 
aFormally, it is called a semi-cycle, since the graph is directed. 
1311 
attributes can be defined, whereas in HTML they 
are fixed. XML documents can be used to exchange 
information that has various data structure. For 
example, Channel Definition Format (CDF)(CDF, 
1997) is a standard to offer frequently updated col
lections of information (channels) on Web. A CDF 
document can contains a collection of articles that 
have tree structure. In this paper, graph structures 
of created threads are represented in XML. Figure 10 
shows a part of the thread in Figure 8. 
The <thread> tag shows the beginning of the 
thread. It contains a set of deceptions for arti
cles, each marked <article>. Each instance of 
the <article> tag has a reference to its source 
document, an identifying id, genus and differentia 
words, and other information on the article. The 
tag <follows> is used to denote arcs from the ar
ticle to related articles. 
The XML documents can be separate from the 
source articles. They can be provided as part of a 
"push" service for Internet users, offering a solution 
to the problem of information overloading. In such 
a service, gatherer collects articles from Web sites 
and threader makes threads for them. The results 
are stored in XML, and then pushed to subscribers 
who can capture the flow of topics by following the 
threads. In another scenario, when a user gets an 
article, and wants to see its origin or the next re
lated article, he or she gets the thread containing 
the article by consulting the threading server. The 
advantage of using XML is that it will be supported 
by various tools, including Web browsers. Now we 
are prototyping the threading service system by us
ing a XML processor developed at our laboratory. 
Figure 12 shows a Java applet for viewing threads, 
which can run on major Web browsers. A XML doc
ument is parsed and visualized as tree-like structure. 
6 Related
Work 
There have been several studies how to relate arti
cles (McKeown et al., 1995; Yamamoto et al., 1995; 
Mani et hi., 1997). McKeown et al. reported a 
method for summarizing news articles (McKeown 
et al., 1995). In their approach, templates, which 
have slots and their values (for example, incident
location= "New York"), are extracted from the ar
ticles. Summary sentences are constructed by com
bining the templates. Although this approach can 
capture topics contained in the articles, the relation
ships between articles are not visualized. 
Clustering techniques make it possible to visual
ize the contents of a set of documents. Hearst et 
hi. proposed the scatter/gather approach for facil
itating information retrieval (Hearst et al., 1995). 
Maarek et al. related documents by using an hier
archical clustering algorithm that interacts with the 
user. Although these clustering algorithms impose a 
procedure GetMaxtPath(A) 
//Get max path MaxPath\[i\] for dl. A is a set of arcs. 
for i = 1 to n begin MaxPath\[i\] +NULL end 
for j = 1 to n begin 
fori=j-ktoj1 begin 
if (di, dj) C A then 
if Length(MaxPath\[j\]) < Length(MaxPath\[i\]) + 1 
then MaxPath\[j\] +Connect(MaxPath\[i\],(dl,dj)) 
i+--i+ 1 
end 
j+-j+l 
end 
procedure Length(path) 
returns the number of arcs in path. 
procedure Connect(path, arc) 
if path = (d0,...,di) and arc = (di,dj), then 
return (do,...,di,d i). 
Figure 11: Procedure for Finding the Longest Path 
heavy computation cost, our threading algorithm is 
efficient, because it uses a chronological constraint. 
7 Conclusion

We have described methods for threading multiple 
articles and for visualizing various characteristics of 
them by using directed graphs. An efficient thread
ing algorithm whose complexity is O(n) (where n is 
the number of articles) was introduced with some 
constraints on the chronological ordering of articles. 
Some further work can be done to improve our 
method. There are sotrle strategies for constructing 
an adjacency matrix from a distance matrix. Differ
ent strategies give different graphs. We are now eval
uating our method by testing it with various strate
gies. 
Tile development of a technique for visualizing di
rected graphs is another task for the future. Al
though directed graphs show more useful informa
tion than tree structures, they are difficult to display 
in a readily understandable way. Software tools for 
handling graphs are also required. 
Formal features of graphs can express the under
lying characteristics of articles. More efficient and 
useful algorithms are needed to overcome the prob
lem of information overload. 

References 

R. Botafogo, E. Rivlin, and B Shnederman. 1992. 
Structural Analysis of Hypertexts: Identifying Hi
erarchies and Useful Metrics. ACM Transaction 
on Information Science, pages 143-179, Vol. 10, 
No. 2. 

M. Damashek. 1995. Gauging Similarity with n
Grams: Language Independent Categorization of 
Text. Pro(:. of Science, pages 843 848, Vol. 267. 

M. A. Hearst, D. R. Karger, and J. O. Pederson. 
1995. Seatter/(lather as a 7bol for Navigation of 
Retrieval Results. Pro(:. of AAAI bhll Symposium 
on AI Applications in Knowledge Navigation and 
Retrieval. 

N. Jar(line, and R. Sibson. 1968. The Construction 
of Hierarchic and Non-Hierarchic Classificatio'ns. 
Computer, pages 177184. 

I. Mani and E. Bloedorn. 1997. Multi-document 
Summarization by Graph Search and Matching 
Proc. of AAAI'97, pages. 622 628. 

Y. Mmlrek and A. Wecker. 1994. The Librarian As
sistant: Automatically Assembling Books into Dy
namic Bookshelves. Proc. of RIAO. 

K. McKeown and 1). Radev. 1995. Generating 
Summaries of Multiple News Articles. Proe. of SI
GIR., pages 74-82. 

S. E. Robertson and K. S. Jones. 1976. Relevance 
Weighting of Search Terms. ,IASIS, pages 129 
146, Vol. 27. 

G. Salton. 1968. Automatic h~formation Organiza o 
tion and Retrieval. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 

T. Bray, .I. Paoli, and C. M. Spcrberg-MeQeen. 1997 
Extensiblc Markup Language (XML). l)roposed 
Recommendation. World Wide Wet) Consortium. 
http: / /www.w3.org/TR/PR~xml/ 

K. Yamamoto, S. Masuyama, and S. Naito. 1995. 
An Empirical Study on Summarizing Multiple 
Texts of .lapanese Newspaper Articles. Proc. of 
NLPRS'95, pages 461--466. 

