Using Leading Text for News Summaries: Evaluation Results and 
Implications for Commercial Summarization Applications 
Mark Wasson 
LEXIS-NEXIS, a Division of Reed Elsevier plc 
9443 Springboro Pike 
Miamisburg, Ohio 45342 USA 
mark.wasson@lexis-nexis.com 
Abstract 
Leading text extracts created to support some 
online Boolean retrieval goals are evaluated 
for their acceptability as news document 
summaries. Results are presented and dis
cussed from the perspective of commercial 
summarization technology needs. 
1 Introduction

The Searchable LEAD system creates a Boolean 
query aid that helps some online customers limit 
their queries to the leading text of news documents. 
Customers who limit their Boolean queries to lead
ing text usually see better precision and an increased 
emphasis on documents with major references to 
their topics in their retrieval results. 
A research team investigating a sentence extraction 
approach to news summarization modified Search
able LEAD to create leading text extracts to use in a 
comparison between approaches. Leading text ex
tracts had a much higher rate of acceptability as 
summaries than the team expected. Because that 
test was limited to 250 documents, we were not 
certain how well leading text would rate as summa
ties on a larger scale, such as across the NEXIS® 
news database. We also could not make any con
elusive statements about where leading text extracts 
routinely fail as summaries for news documents. 
This paper presents the results of an investigation 
into how Searchable LEAD-based leading text ex
tracts rate as summaries and where those extracts 
Nil. The results support the use of leading text as 
general purpose summaries for news documents. 
2 Searchable
LEAD Overview 
Searchable LEAD was originally implemented to 
provide LEXIS-NEXIS customers with the means 
to limit Boolean queries to key parts of news docu
ments. It is based on the premise that major entities 
and topics of news stories are usually introduced in 
the leading portion of news documents. Searchable 
LEAD targets the subset of news information cus
tomers who want to retrieve documents that contain 
major references to their targeted topics but not 
documents that only mention those topics in passing. 
These customers generally can expect higher preci
sion and lower recall when they restrict their Boo
lean queries to the headline and leading text than if 
they were to apply their queries to the full text. 
Documents in our news database have several text 
fields including HEADLINE and BODY fields. 
Searchable LEAD software identifies the leading 
portion of the BODY field and labels it the "LEAD" 
field. The amount of the BODY field that is in
cluded in the LEAD is based on document length. 
Minimum thresholds for the number of words, sen
tences and paragraphs to include in LEADs increase 
as document length increases. 
In an examination of more than 9,000 news docu
ments from more than 250 publications, we found 
that short documents usually begin with good topic
summarizing leading sentences, what we call the 
log4cal lead. Longer documents, however, more 
often begin with anecdotal information before pre
senting the logical lead. LEAD fields must be 
longer for these documents in order to include the 
logical lead in most instances. Using a fixed 
amount of leading text regardless of document 
length would have resulted in LEADs that include 
1364 
too much text beyond the logical lead for shorter 
doctunents, and LEADs that miss the logical lead 
entirely for longer documents. 
Customers can limit part or all of a Boolean query 
to the LEAD, as the following query shows: 
LEAD(CLINTON) AND BUDGET 
This query will retrieve only thosc documents that 
contahl "Clinton" in the LEAD and "budget" any
where in the document. Customers who use LEAD 
routinely combine it with the HEADLINE field. 
We tested 20 queries on a database that contains 20 
million documents from more than 10,000 English 
language news publications. Each query was ap
plied to the HEADLINE and BODY fields (abbre
viated here as HBODY) and to the HEADLINE and 
LEAD fields (HLEAD). Queries were limited by 
date in order to reduce file magnitude of the evalua
tion task. In order to obtain a more complete pic
ture of recall, other queries were used to identify 
relevant documents that the tested queries missed. 
The results in Table 1 show that limiting Boolean 
queries to leading text can help Searchable LEAD's 
nmtic News Extraction System, or ANES. ANES 
combined statistical corpus analysis, signature word 
selection and sentence weighting to select sentences 
for inclusion in summaries. By varying the nmnber 
of sentences selected, ANES-generated extracts 
could meet targeted sunmtary lengths. 
ANES was evaluated using a corpus of 250 docu
ments from newswire, magazine and newspaper 
publications. ANES was used to generate three 
summaries for each document, targeting sununary 
lengths of 60, 150 and 250 words. For a baseline 
comparison, a modified version of the Searchable 
LEAD software was used to create three fixed 
length leading text summaries for each document, 
also targeting lengtks of 60, 150 and 250 words. 
News analysts re>ad each document and its corre
sponding smnmaries, and rated the summaries on 
their acceptability. Table 2 shows file results for 
each approach. Overall, 74% of the ANES summa
ries were judged to be acceptable. Unexpectedly, 
the acceptability rate for leading text summaries 
was significantly higher. Overall, 92% of file lead
ing text sunmmries were judged to be acceptable. 
targeted customers. Summary ANES Leading Text 
Document Average Average Average of Length Acceptable Acceptable 
Fields Precision Recall F-measures 60 words 68% 87% 
HLEAD .472 .600 .432 150 words 76% 93% 
HBODY .208 .793 .288 250 words 78% 96% 
Table 1. hnpact of LEAD Restrictions on BooOverall 74% 92% 
lean Retrieval Quality (20-query test) Table 2. Acceptability Rates Comparison be
tween ANES and Leading Text Searchable LEAD document processing software 
consists of a 500-statement PL 1 progrmn and a 23
rule sentence and paragraph boundary recognition 
grmnmar, and operates in a mainframe MVS envi
ronment. Searchable LEAD processes over 500,000 
characters (90 news documents) per CPU second. 
3 Related
Work 
There is a growing body of research into approaches 
ibr generating text surrmmries, including approaches 
based on sentence extraction (Kupice et al., 1995), 
text generation from templates (McKeown and 
Radev, 1995) and machine-assisted abstraction 
(Tsou ct al., 1992). Brandow et al. (1995) reported 
on a sentence extraction approach called the Auto
The results for both approaches showed a promising 
start towards the goal of creating summaries for 
news documents. However, those results also raised 
questions about leading text. We wanted to better 
understand the value of leading texts as general pur
pose news docmnent sunmmries. 
4 Methodology

Our investigation had two goals: to verify on a 
larger scale the results that Brandow et al. (1995) 
suggested for leading text, and to determine whether 
there are easily definable indicators of where leading 
text extracts fare poorly as general purpose news 
document summaries. 
1365 
We used the Searchable LEAD definition of leading 
text as our summaries. The LEAD fields vary in 
length based on overall document length, which we 
believe helps them capture the logical lead. Also, 
LEAD fields already existed in our news documents 
in support of another application, Boolean retrieval. 
We did not modify Searchable LEAD software or 
any LEAD fields for this investigation. 
The test corpus consisted of 2,727 documents from 
more than 100 English language news publications. 
Documents were retrieved from our news database 
using several queries. Some queries were biased 
towards longer documents or to sources that provide 
transcripts. We believed that LEADs for such 
documents would pose more problems than would 
LEADs for typical news stories, based on past in
formal observations of LEAD fields. Because of 
the query bias, the test corpus does not represent our 
news database. For example, only 5.5% of the 
documents in the test corpus were less than 120 
words long, whereas 18% of the documents in our 
news database are that short. Newspapers provide 
almost 60% of the documents in our news database 
but only a third of the test corpus documents. 
In order to investigate where LEADs might fail as 
summaries, we assigned attributes to each document 
that allowed us to examine various subsets of the 
test corpus. Attributes included the following: 
• BODY field and LEAD field word counts 
• Source type (newspaper, wire service, newslet
ter, magazine, transcript service) 
• Subject matter (biographical, financial, legal, 
legal news, other news, reviews, scientific) 
• Document type (general news, which includes 
standard news articles, graphics, editorials, 
LEAD=BODY, letters/Q&A columns, and mu
sic and book reviews; lists; newsbriefs; and 
television program transcripts) 
* United States or non-United States source 
News analysts read each document and rated its 
corresponding LEAD field on its acceptability as a 
general purpose summary for that document. They 
rated the LEADs as either acceptable or unaccept
able. Ratings were linked to document attributes in 
an evaluation file that contained one record for each 
document. This file was analyzed to obtain de
scriptive information about the test corpus and to 
compare attributes and ratings. 
5 Results

Overall, 82.3% of LEADs were rated acceptable as 
summaries. However, because of differences be
tween test corpus content and the content of our 
news database, this acceptability rate is not an over
all indicator for our news database. 
Docmnent type was the most distinguishhlg attrib
ute for identifying potential problem LEADs. For 
the general news document type, 94.1% of LEADs 
were rated acceptable as stmamaries. Acceptability 
rates were much lower for lists, newsbriefs and 
transcripts, as Table 3 shows. 
Document Number of Acceptability 
Type Documents Rate 
General News 1,951 94.1% 
Lists 86 12.8% 
Newsbriefs 191 24.6% 
Transcripts 499 70.3% 
Table 3. Acceptability Rates for Document 
Types 
The 94.1% acceptability rate for general news 
documents is not appreciably different from the 
92% average that Brandow et al. (1995) reported. 
The results for lists and newsbriefs were not sur
prising. Such documents seldom have logical leads. 
Lists primarily consist of several like items, such as 
products and their prices, or companies and corre
sponding stock quotes. In rare instances, the BODY 
of a list type document includes a brief description 
of the contents of the list that Searchable LEAD can 
capture, ha most cases, however, there is nothing 
meaningful for any technology to extract. 
Ncwsbrief doctunents usually consist of several of
ten unrelated stories combined into one document. 
In some newsbrief documents, however, there is an 
introduction that Searchable LEAD can exploit. 
This was especially true for newsbrief documents 
from wires (67.4% acceptability on 46 documents), 
but rarely true for either magazines (13.8% accept
1366 
ability on 109 documents) or newspapers (3.1% 
acceptability on 32 documents). 
LEADs tbr transcript type documents fared some
what better, with source being a factor for these 
also. LEADs for transcripts from transcript sources 
were less likely to be rated acceptable (67.8% ac
ceptability on 435 documents) than those from wires 
(90.0% acceptability on 40 documents) or newslet
ters (83.3% acceptability on 24 documents). 
Among general news documents, only LEADs for 
the review sub-type trod a low acceptability rate, as 
Table 4 shows. 
General News Number of Acceptability 
Sub-types Documents Rate 
News Articles 1,806 95.5% 
Reviews 58 48.3% 
All Others 87 95.4% 
Table 4. Acceptability Rates for General News 
Document Sub-types 
"lhe distribution of list, newsbrief and transcript 
type documents was often the cause of other appar
ent problem-indicating attributes. For example, the 
overall acceptability rate for LEADs for United 
States sources was 80.1% on 2,141 doctunents, 
whereas the overall acceptability rate for non-United 
States sources was 90.4% on 586 documents. 
When list, newsbrief and transcript documents were 
removeA, the acceptability rate for United States 
sources was 94.5% on 1,391 documents, and the 
acceptability rate for non-United States sources was 
93.0% on 560 documents. 
When examining other general news document at
tributes, we found that only LEADs for magazines 
had a somewhat lower acceptability rate (Table 5). 
Source Number of Acceptability 
Type Documents Rate 
Magazines 470 88.5% 
Newsletters 217 98.2% 
Newspapers 880 94.2% 
Transcripts 7 100.0% 
Wires 377 98.1% 
Table 5. Acceptability Rates for General News 
by Source Type 
The review sub-type was a factor here. Many of 
those were from magazines. Excluding those, the 
acceptability rate for magazine LEADs climbed to 
92.5%, still lower than for any other source. 
Document length was a factor for LEAD accept
ability for the entire test corpus, but list, newsbrief 
and transcript type docunaents are typically longer 
titan general news documents. Document length 
was less of a factor when looking only at LEADs 
for general news documents (Table 6). 
BODY Length Number of Acceptability 
Documents Rate 
0-119 words 151 97.4% 
120-299 words 168 98.2% 
300-599 words 312 95.8% 
600-1199 words 548 94.9% 
1200+ words 772 91.2% 
Table 6. Acceptability Rates for General News 
by Document Length 
The length of the LEAD itself was not tied to ac
ceptability tbr either the entire test corpus or the 
general news document subset. 
6 Discussion

The results of this hwcstigation show that leading 
text can provide acceptable smnrnaries for most 
general news documents. These results are consis
tent with Brandow et al. (1995). However, we also 
found that leading text is much less likely to provide 
acceptable summaries for news documents with 
certain smlcmrcs, including list, newsbrief and tran
script documents. We identified review type docu
ments as a problem area, but these represent a small 
fraction of news data. More noteworthy was the 
observation that almost one of every eight LEADs 
for general news documents from nmgazines were 
rated unacceptable as sunmmries. 
Kupice et al. (1995) compared their trainable 
document summarizer results and similar ,'unounts 
of leading text to nmnually constructed keys. The 
sentences that their summarizer extracted over
lapped 42% of the sentences in the keys, compared 
to 24% for leadhlg text. Both percentages are much 
lower than what Brandow et al. (1995) reported, but 
differences between the evaluation approaches used 
1367 
is the probable reason. Kupiec et al. (1995) noted 
that there may be more than one good summary for 
a given document, something that a key approach to 
evaluation does not capture. Brandow et al. (1995) 
found this to be the case for some documents where 
all ANES-generated and leading text summaries 
were rated as acceptable. Some differences in re
sults may also be attributed to the test data used. 
Kupiec et al. (1995) used scientific and technical 
documents rather than general news. 
Leading text extracts such as the LEAD field are 
appealing for commercial use as summaries for a 
number of reasons. For general news documents, 
they are usually acceptable as summaries. They are 
easy and inexpensive to create. Leading text ex
tracts also have two less obvious advantages over 
other approaches. First, legal restrictions often pre
vent us from manipulating copyrighted material. 
Leading text extracts often preserve the existing 
copyright. Second, when leading text fails as a 
summary, customers can see why. Customer un
derstanding of how a data feature is created is often 
key to customer acceptance of that feature. 
There are, however, a number of reasons why we 
need to consider alternatives to leading text. First, 
not all doctmaents have a logical lead that can be 
exploited. In this investigation, we found that to be 
the case for most list and newsbrief documents and 
for many transcripts. Beyond news data, this holds 
for case law documents, many types of financial 
documents, and others. 
Second, a static summary such as one based on 
leading text represents a "one size fits all" approach 
to summarization. Readers bring their own interests 
to documents. A dynamic summary generator, per
haps using readers' queries to guide it, can help 
readers focus on those parts of a document that are 
most relevant to them. 
Third, a hybrid approach to summary generation 
may improve acceptability for news documents. 
Lin & Hovy (1997) describe methods for identifying 
the likely locations of topic-bearing sentences. 
Comparing the content of leading text extracts to 
predictions of topic-bearing sentences may help us 
predict where leading text fails as a summary so 
that we can direct more sophisticated approaches to 
those documents. 
The commercial use of leading text summaries such 
as Searchable LEAD by no means suggests that 
news summarization is a solved problem. There are 
a nunabcr of data types where leading text has di
rninished or no value as a summary. Where it does 
succeed, an approach like Searchable LEAD may 
serve as a starting point for improved lcading text 
summaries or as a benchmark for comparing alter
natives that are not restricted by the limits inherent 
in leading text approaches to summarization. 
Acknowledgments 
I would like to thank colleagues Christi Wilson and 
David Schincer for reading, rating and assigning 
attributes to the 2,727 test corpus documents and 
LEADs. I would also like to thank Breck Baldwin, 
Afsar Parhizgar, David Schmcer and Paul Zhang 
for their comments and suggestions. 

References 

Brandow, R., Mitze, K. and Rau, L. (1995) Auto
matic Condensation of Electronic Publications 
by Sentence Selection. Information Processing & 
Management, 31/5, pp. 675-685. 

Kupiee, J., Pedersen, J., and Chen, F. (1995) A 
Trainable Document ,Summarizer. Proceedings 
of the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in In
fornmtion Retrieval, pp. 68-73. 

Lin, C.-Y., and Hovy, E. (1997) IdentTfying lbpics 
by Position. Proceedings of the Fifth Conference 
on Applied Natural Language Processing, pp. 
283 -290. 

McKeown, K., and Radev, D. (1995). Generating 
Summaries of Multiple News Articles. Proceed
ings of the 18th Annual International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in In
formation Retrieval, pp. 74-82. 

Tsou, B., Ho, H.-C., Lai, T., Lun, C., and Lin, H.
L. (1992) A Knowledge-based Machine-aided 
System for Chinese Text Abstraction. COL1NG
92 Proceedings, pp. 1039-1042. 

