From Information Structure to Intonation: A Phonological 
Interface for Concept-to-Speech 
Hannes Pirker, Georg Niklfeld, Johannes Matiasek and Harald Trost + 
{hmmes,georgn,john,harald}¢~ai.univie.~c.at 
Austrian Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence (OFAI)* 
Schotteng. 3, A-1010 Vienna, Austria 
+ Department of Medical Cybernetics and Artificial Intelligence University of Vienna 
Freyung 6, A-1010 Vienna, Austria 
Abstract 
The pal)er describes an interface between gen
erator and synthesizer of tile German language 
concept-to-speech system VieCtoS. It discusses 
phenomena in German intonation that depend 
on the interaction between grammatical depen
dencies (projection of information structure into 
syntax) and prosodic context (performance
related modifications to intonation patterns). 
Phonological processing in our system con> 
prises segmental as well as suprasegmental di
mensions such as syllabification, modification of 
word stress positions, and a symbolic encoding 
of intonation. Phonological phenomena often 
touch upon more than one of these dimensions, 
so that mutual accessibility of the data struc
tures on each dimension had to be ensured. 
We present a linear representation of the 
multidimensional phonological data based on a 
straightforward linearization convention, which 
suffices to bring this conceptually multilinear 
data set under the scope of the well-known pro
cessing techniques for two-level morphology. 
1 Introduction

The task of interfacing between a tactical gen
erator and a speech synthesizer is two-fold: A 
gralnmatical description enriched with semantic 
and pragmatic features has to be translated into 
a (qualitative) phonological description which 
then has to be mapped onto the set of (quanti
tative) parameter values needed as input to the 
synthesizer. 
The requirements imposed by a concept-to
speech system differ Dora those on both text 
generation and text-to-speech systems. In 
* This work has been sponsored by the Fonds zur 
Farde,'ung der wissenschaftlichen Pbrschung (FWF), 
(;rant No. P10822. 
text generation the generator produces a se
quence of abstract descriptions of word forms 
whMl are-either by direct access to a lexicon 
or via a morphological component-transformed 
into strings of graphemes and output. With 
concept-to-speech the task is more complex. 
Not only is segmental information influenced 
by morphonology and post-lexical rules (cover
ing, e.g., reduction and assimilation phenom
ena) but-more important-suprasegmental in
formation must be provided ms well. 
Compared to text-to-speech the task is at 
the same time easier and more difficult. In
formation fi'om pragmatic, semantic and syn
tactic layers are readily available. This elimi
nates the need to analyze an input text for nec
essary cues to collie 21p with prot)er pronunci
ation and prosody. On the other hand all this 
information must be l)roperly accounted for to 
come up with an adequate description of the 
utterance that-when fed into the synthesizer
produces high-quality output. In particular, 
pragmatic-semantic features must be mapped 
onto (abstract) prosodic features. 
We employ an extended version of two-level 
morphology (Trost 91) for this interface. 1 The 
formalism proved to be very well suited for the 
task. The various ahnost independent subsys
tems can be kept conceptually separate result
ing in good transl)arency while at the same time 
enabling the necessary amount of interaction 
between them. 
2 A
Concept-to-Speech Generation 
System 
Our concept-to-sl)eech generation system con
sists of a pipeline of modules (Pig. 1). A text 
1The extension regards tile fact that tile system al
lows the use of (feature-based) external information so
called tilters-to restrict the application of two-level rules. 
1041 
planning component produces sentence plans, 
which are fed into the tactical generator. 
The implementation basis for the tactical 
generator is the FUF (Elhadad 91) system. 
FUF is based on the theory of functional unifi
cation grammar and employs both phrase struc
ture rules and unification of feature descrip
tions. Input is a partially specified feature de
scription which constrains the utterance to be 
generated. Output is a %lly specified feature 
description (in the sense of the particular gram
mar) subsumed by the input structure, which is 
then linearized to yield a sentence. 
The tactical generator has two layers. One 
is dealing with sentence level generation, pro
ducing a tree-like description of a sentence, the 
leaves of which are lemmata annotated with 
morphosyntactic and prosodic features. The 
second performs generation at the word level 
producing annotated phonological representa
tions of the inflected word forms which are fed 
into the extended 2 two-level phonology compo
nent applying morphological and phonological 
rules to arrive at the representation used as in
l)ut for st)eech synthesis. 
A distinguishing feature of the gruInmar used 
in the generator is the integration of sentence
level and word-level processing within the same 
formalism. 
Text Planner \]I 
ii ' Ta'ctical G:nera;or iiill 
:-ii Sentence Level Processing i := 
!i I Word Level Procossin~l 
I Speech S~nthesis I~ 
Figure 1: Architecture 
This architecture forms an ideal platform for 
the implementation of the phonological inter
face. Necessary adaptions are limited to the 
data used: An existing grammar was extended 
with features describing the information struc
ture. The lexicon consists of entries in phonemic 
form (using SAMPA notation) enriched with in
:The filter handling uses the FUF formalism and the 
same unification machinery as the grammar. 
formation like (potential) accent and syllable 
boundary positions. 
Input to the synthesizer is a SAMPA string 
enriched with qualitative encodings of prosodic 
information (e.g., pitch accent, pauses, ...) pro
duced by the two-level rules. PhonologicM spec
ifications of intonation are processed by a pho
netic interpreter (Pirker et el. 97) that trans
forms these qualitative labels into quantitative 
acoustic i)arameters. Although some interpreta
tive work is done within the synthesizer, no lin
guistically motivated transformations are sup
posed to take place there. These all are per
formed within the two-level component. 
3 The
Phonological Interface 
3.1 Phenomena
handled 
The phonological description in extended two
level morphology in our case rather two-level 
phonology-serves as the central interface where 
the modules for grammar processing and for 
speech synthesis meet and communicate. 
A fairly complex model of phonology is re
quired in the system, also because the over
all objective of the project was to investigate 
whether and how conditions in the concept-to
speech task favour a more elaborate treatment 
of prosodic parameters in speech generation. 
The phonological descril)tion is implemented 
in the extended two-level fi'amework described 
in section 2 and works over a lexicon of phone
mic (rather than graphemic) representations of 
word stems and inflectional attixes. Morpho
tactic processing is thus restricted to inflec
tion, whereas conlt)ounding and derivational af
fixation are encoded in the lexicon, which is 
typically small in domain-tailored concept-to
speech systems. 
Nevertheless, in segmental phonology, the 
coml)onent must coml)ute morl)honological 
rules in inflection as well as post-lexical rules 
which interact with syllabification and cliticiza
tion. 
To determine German syllabification and 
cliticization correctly, it is necessary to operate 
on structures larger than single words. There
fore phonological processing applies to chunks 
whose size depends on the one rule in the sys
tem that requires the largest phonological con
text to operate correctly. Because of the into
nation rules discussed in section 4, phonological 
1042 
l)rocessing applies to tile whole utterance. 
The three phonological aspects segmental 
representation, syllabification, and word stress 
are mutually dependent in German l)honology 
in all logically possible directions (Niklfeld et al. 
95). Tile phonology colnponent treats them in 
a unified description, which also covers the rare 
cases of word-internal and phrase-level stress 
shift in Gernlan. a 
While some segmental and SUl)ra-segmental 
rules in tile phonological description del)end on 
1)honological context only, some others (like the 
rule for stress shifts as described above) depend 
on grammatical information on levels as high 
u 1) as textual representation. For example, the 
Gernlan word for "weather" loses word stress 
in comt)ounds when they at)l)ear in weather
reports (where tile concept weather is "textually 
exot)horic" (Benware 87)). Such t)henomena are 
encoded in our extended two-level system by 
phonological rules which access the grammat
ical ret)resentation via feature-tilters. 
There are few theoretical fl'ameworks in 
COml)utational linguistics for tackling such a 
breadth of phonological issues. Linguistically 
ambitions approaches are often designed with 
little regard to ease of use in large descril)
tions, whereas leaner formalisms do not scale 
well to complex data stretching across a number 
of phonological dimensions. The chosen frame
work of extended two-level phonology stands 
between these poles. 
3.2 Linearization
of multi-tier 
phonological structures 
As the two-level framework assumes one lexi
cal and one surface string only, we use a linear 
rel)resentation of our multklimensional phono
logical data, as follows: 
Each linear phonological string in the con> 
ponent stands for a multi-tler structure which 
combines ~ given number of separate dimensions 
of phonological structure. The tier ofphonolog
icM segments (members of the German SAMPA 
set) is used to provide the backbone of skeletal 
points on which all units of the representation 
are linked together. Each unit on any phono
logical tier has SCOl)e over/has a~s its domain a 
continuous section of skeleton t)oints. For each 
aOtherwise, German has lexically specified word 
sl;ress, 
tier, a convention is provided which designates 
that part of each domain that is used for the 
linking. For some supra-segnmntal tiers (sylla
bles, phonological woMs) the leftmost unit of 
the scope domain as computed by the resl)ec
rive rule is used for this purpose. For other 
tiers the domain edges are unspecified in the 
lexicon (stresses and accents, which have scoI)e 
over stretches of syllables), and therefore other 
well-defined parts of the scope domain are used 
for the linking (such as the vocalic nucleus of 
a syllable). Where it apl)ears natural to do 
so, units on certain phonological tiers are also 
linked to right domain edges (~s is the case with 
phrase and boundary tone markers, which have 
scope over any phonological material between a 
nuclear tone and the right boundary of an into
nation phrase.) 
While these representations clearly encode 
some fraglnent of atttosegmental phonology in 
an implicit way, they do not allow for the at
tachment of more than one suprasegmental nnit 
from the same tier to a single segmental unit. 
Such power was not needed in our al)t)lication. 
The representation allowed for easy incremen
tal extensions to our descriptions, as additional 
tiers of rel)resentation were added as the cover
age of higher-level prosodic issues such as sen
tence intonation was extended. 
3.3 hnplementational notes 
Using the linearized representation, the well
known processing schemes for two-level mor
phology can be applied directly. Conteml)o
ral'y compilers for two-level morphology allow 
to specify sets of syml)ols that are ignored in 
individual rules. Extensive application of snch 
syntactic sugar enables us to keel) tile rule for
mulations over the collapsed representation eco
nomical and relatively transparent. We note 
in passing that although collapsing multilinear 
data-structures onto a single tier increases the 
llkeliness of combin~torlal explosion in process
ing when using the two-level altomata as trans
ducei% it turns out that in our ah'eady quite 
complex descril)tion this does not become a real 
probleln. 
Ill earlier publications, we described how 
we implement phonological generalizations that 
stretch across phonologicM dimensions (Niklfeld 
et al. 95), and we l)rot)osed implementations of 
Sul)rasegmental issues such as stress shift and 
1043 
the projection of pitch accents depending on fo
cus information (Niklfeld $z Alter 96). We have 
also discussed time structure (Alter et al. 96). 
In section 4 we go beyond this to show that 
intonation in German has properties that are 
best implemented by combining our two-level 
phonologicM description, which is well-suited to 
express constraints on linear contexts, with the 
power of a unification-based feature grammar. 
4 Dealing
with Intonation 
This section describes the novel approach of us
ing the extended two-level component for spec
ifying "al)prot)riate" intonation and t)hrasing. 
4.1 Different
perspectives 
The diversity of factors that influences intona
tion is mirrored in the variety of research that 
deals with intonation: 
Phonologists and phoneticians are concerned 
with the inspection of the form of intona
tion contours, while on the other hand there 
is a strong tradition in the field of syn
tax (keyword: focus projection) and seman
tics/pragmatics (keyword: given vs. new infor
mation) that merely deal with the prol)lem of 
accent location, neglecting its form. 
Another strand of research deals with the cou
pling of information structure and phonology, 
i.e., the tight association of meanings and tunes 
such as in (Prevost & Steedman 94) where the 
classification of the utterance's elements Mong 
the dimensions th.em, e/rheme and focus~ground 
unambiguously triggers the selection of tones. 
In the field of text-to-st)eech synthesis, at last, 
intonation most often is handled by using algo
rithms and heuristics that intermingle informa
tion on syntax, punctuation, word-class infor
his(ion etc. in a rather unstructured way. 
4.2 Our
design 
In our system a strict separation of levels is eln
ployed: only the two-level component deals with 
tonal specifications. Within the tactical gener
ator only candidate positions for both 1)itch ac
cents and phrasM boundaries are selected. 
This reflects the fact that though prosody 
heavily depends on grammatical and pragmatic 
factors, its realization is also strongly influenced 
by phonological and phonetic constraints which 
are much more "naturally" handled by the two
level component. In the terminology of two
level lnorphology the grammar provides a un
derspecified lexical representation from which 
the concrete surface form is derived. In the 
lexicon every (accentable) word contains an ab
stract pitch tone (T) within its phonemic rel)
resentation. The "lexical boundaries" (B), i.e., 
candidates for boundaries between intonational 
phrases (IP), are inserted by the generator in 
between words and these 1" and B are then 
mapped to GToBI labels (German Tone~ and 
" e Break Indices(Grlc. et al. 96)) or discarded 
i.e., mapl)ed it to surface O. 
The following example (in pseudo-code) de
fines a basic condition on the IP: it contains at 
least one, at most three pitch accents, and has 
an obligatory boundary tone. 
<IP> ::= -\[<P it ¢hTone>{<P it chTone>}} 
<P it chTone><IP_Bound> 
<IP_Bound> ::= L-LY. I L-HY. I H-LY. I H-HY, 
<PitchTone>::= <RisingT> I <FallingT> 
<RisingT> ::= H* I L+H* I L*+H 
<FallingT> ::= L* I H+L* I H+!H* 
In order to determine the realization of a T 
the grammatical information the generator pro
vided for the word in question is inspected via, 
the filter mechanism: E.g. if a words was 
marked as unaccented (ace -) the tone will be 
discarded or the selection of boundary tones is 
triggered by the sentence type (L-LX in the case 
of assertions): 
T:0 <= _ filter:(head (phon (ace -))); 
B:L-L% <=> _ filter: (head (s-type assert)); 
While the rules discussed so fat' have been 
pure filter applications the last rule encodes a 
constraint on phonological context: 
B:L-H% => <FallingT> <UnaccSyll>* _ \] 
<RisingT> <UnaccSyll> <UnaccSyll>+ _; 
I ,H* L-H% , H* ' 'H-L% 
Figure 2: Contours to be avoided (vertical lines 
designate syllable boundaries) 
The rationale behind this rule is, that we want 
to avoid the contours shown in figure 2 when re
alizing IP boundaries. The L-H% boundary basi
(:ally designates a fall-rise contour which should 
1044 
I)e a felicitous if the last pitch accent 1)efore 
the boundary was a falling one. The second 
term states, that after a rising I)itch accent the 
same boundary contour is to be produced only 
if the pitch peak is followed by two or more 
unaccented syllables thus ensuring that there 
is "enough time" to produce the fall-rise. At 
the same time the production of the concurring 
H-LY, is I)locked, which would produce a long 
monotonous stretch on a high level, that might 
be perceived as unnatural. 
The rules thus also iml)lement some of the 
variability in prosody that is due to the interac
tion of phrasing and t)itch accents much in the 
spMt of tone-linking (Gussenhoven 84). 
5 Conclusion

With our approach we unify some of the efforts 
outlined in d.1 and come up with a system that 
is more clearly structured than the "algorith
mic" approach. 
By basing our work on GToBI and thus on 
a w~riant of Pierrehumbert's model on intona
tion-we have access to the wealth of l)hono
logical research undertaken in the tone sequence 
paradigm. 
The handling of accentuation and phrasing by 
the generator resembles the syntacto-semantic 
approaches. Only a few tams such as emphasis 
\[:EMPH\] and (conceptual or textual) givenness 
\[GIVEN\] which are rather easily identitiable by 
the conceptual component and have a straight
forward influence on the t)honetic realization are 
used. In this resl)ect our approach is less re
lined than, e.g., (Prevost &: Steedman 94) as no 
fully fledged semantic Inodule is integrated that 
could deal with aspects of information structure 
in a really princil)led way 
On the other hand we emI)loy a very flexible 
and transl)arent phonological model. But not 
all intonation contours that can be observed in 
human speakers are equally convenient for the 
use in synthetic speech, where the deviations 
in duration, amplitude, etc. may lead to results 
that are perceived as highly unnatural. We thus 
restrict the set of possible contours licensed by 
the GToB1 to a simplified subset. 
The system is implemented and deals with 
the task of generating monologuous weather re
ports. 

References 

Alter K., Matiasek J., Niklfeld G.: Modeling 
Prosody in a German Concept-to-Speech Sys
tem, in Gibbon D.(ed.), Natural Language 
Processing and Speech Technology, Mouton 
de Gruyter, Berlin, 1996. 

Benware W.A.: Accent Variation in German 
Nominal Compounds of the Type (A (BC)), 
IAnguisdsche Berichte, 108:102-27, 1987. 

Elhadad M.: FUF: The Universal Unifier 
User Manual, Dept.of Computer Science, 
Columbia University, 1991. 

C, rice M., Reyelt M., Benzmiiller R., Mayer 
J., Batliner A.: Consistency in Transcrip
tion attd Labelling of German Intonation with 
GToBI, l'roc, of ICSLP 96, Philadelphia, 
pp.1716-19, 1996. 

Gussenhoven C.: On the grammar and seman
tics of sentence accents, Dordrecht: Foris, 
1984. 

Niklfeld G., Pirker It., Trost I1.: Using Two
Level Morphology as a GeneratorSynthe
sizer Interface in Concel)t-to-Speech , in \['roc. 
of Eurospeech 95, Madrid, 2:1223-26, 1995. 

Niklfeld G., Alter K.: ('.overing prosody in 
concept-to-speech via an extended two-level
phonology component, in Computational 
Phonology in Speech Technology -2nd Meet
ing of SIGPHON, Santa Cruz, CA, 1996. 

Matiasek ,I., Trust li.: An HPSG-Based Gen
erator for German An Experiment in the 
Reusability of Linguistic l{esources, in Proc. 
of COLIN(I 96, Copenhagen, pp.752-57, 
1996. 

Pirker H., Alter K., Matiasek J., Trost II., Ku
bin G.: A System of Stylized Intonation Con
tours for German, in Proc. of Eurospeech 97, 
Rhodes, Greece, 1:307-10, 11997. 

l:'revost S., Steedman M.: Specifying Intonation 
from Context for Speech Synthesis, Speech 
Corn mu nication, 15:139-153, 1994. 

Trost, t1.: X2MORF: A Morphological Compo
nent Based on Augmented Two-Level Mor
phology, in: IJCAI-91, Morgan Kaufm~nn, 
San Mateo, C.A, pp.1024-1030, 1991. 5 

