Multilingual Computational Semantic Lexicons in Action: 
WYSINNWYG Approach to NLP 
Evelyne Viegas 
New Mexico State University 
Computing Research Laboratory 
Las Cruces, NM 88003 
USA 
viegasOcr\], nmsu. edu 
The 
Abstract 
Much effort has been put into computational lex
icons over tile years, and most systems give much 
room to (lexical) semantic data. However, in these 
systems, the effort put on tile study and representa
tion of lexical items to express the umterlying contin
uum existing in 1) language vagueness and polysemy, 
and 2) language gaps and mismatches, has remained 
embryonic. A sense enumeration approach fails from 
a theoretical point of view to capture the core mean
ing of words, let, alone relate word meanings to one 
another, and complicates the task of NLP by multi
plying ambiguities in analysis and choices in genera
tion. In this paper, I study computational semantic 
lexicon representation from a multilingual point of 
view, recom:iling different approaches to lexicon rep
resentation: i) vagueness for lexemes which have a 
more or less finer grained semantics with respect to 
other languages; ii) underspecification for lexemes 
which have multiple related facets; and, iii) lexi
cal rules to relate systematic polysemy to systematic 
ambiguity. I build on a What You See Is Not Neces
sarily What You Get (WYSINNWYG) approach to 
provide the NLP system with the "right" lexical data 
already tuned towards a particular task. In order to 
do so, I argue for a lexical semantic approach to lex~ 
icon representation. I exemplify my study through 
a cross-linguistic investigation on spatially-based ex
pressions. 
1 A
Cross-linguistic Investigation on 
Spatially-based Expressions 
In this paper, I argue for computational seman
tic lexicons as active knowledge sources in or
der to provide Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
systeins with the "right" lexical semantic represen
tation to accomplish a particular task. In other 
words, lexicon entries are "pre-digested", via a lex
ieal processor, to best fit an NLP task. This 
What You See (in your lexicon) Is Not Necessarily 
What You Get (as input to your program) (WYSIN
NWYG) approach requires the adoption of a sym
bolic paradigm. Formally, I use a combination 
of three different approaches to lexicon repre, sen
tations: (1) lexico-semantic vagueness, for lexemes 
which have a more or less fner graine, d semantics 
with re, spect to other languages (for instance cn in 
Spanish is vague between the Contact and Container 
senses of the Location, whereas in English it is finer 
grained, with on for the former and in for the lat
ter); (2) lexico-semantic underspecification, for lex
emes which have multiple related facets (such as for 
instance, door which is underspecified with respect 
to its Aperture or PhysicalObjeet meanings); and, 
(3) lcxical rules, to relate systematic polysemy to 
systematic ambiguity (such as tile Food Or Animal 
rule for lamb). 
I illustrate the WYSINNWYG approach via a 
cross-linguistic investigation (English, French, Span
ish) on spatially-based expressions, as lexicalised, 
for instance, in the prepositions in, above, on, ..., 
verbs traverscr, ("go" across) in French, predicative 
n(mns montdc, (going up) in French, or in adjec
tives upright. Processing spatially-based expressions 
in a multilingual environment is a difficult problem 
as these lexemes exhibit a high degree of polysemy 
(in particular for prepositions) and of language gaps 
(i.e., when there is not a one-to-one, mapping be
tween languages, whatever the linguistic h;vel; lex
ical, semantic, syntactic, etc). Therefore, process
ing these expressions or words in a multilingual c,n
viromnent minimally involves having a solution for 
treating: (a) syntactic divergences, swim across --+ 
traverser' ... d la nage in French ((:ross ... swim
ruing); (b) semantic mismatches, river translates 
into fleuve, rivi~re in French; and (c), cases which lie 
in between clear-cut cases of language gaps (stand -+ 
se tenir debout/se tenlr, lie --+ se tenir allongd/se 
tenir). Researchers have dealt, with a) and/or b), 
whereas WYSINNWYG presents a uniform treat
ment of a), b) and c), by allowing words to have 
their meanings vary in context. 
In this paper, I restrict my cross-linguistic study 
to tile (lexieal) semantics of words with a fo
cus on spatially-based expressions, and consider lit
eral or non-figurative meanings only. In the next 
sections, I address representational problems which 
must be solved in order to best capture the phenom
1321 
ena of ambiguity, polysemy and language gaps from 
a lexical semantic viewpoint. I then present three 
different ways of capturing the phenomena: lexico
semantic vagueness, lexico-semantic nnderspecifica
tion and lexical rules. 
1.1 The
Language Gap Problem 
Upon a close examination of empirical data, it is 
often difficult to classify a translation pair as a syn
tactic divergence (e.g., Dorr, 1990; Levin and Niren
burg, 1993), as in he limped up the stairs --~ il monta 
les marches en boitant (French) (he went up the 
stairs limping) or a semantic mismatch (e.g., Palmer 
and Zhibiao, 1995; Kameyama et al., 1991), as in lie, 
stand ~ se tenir (French). Moreover, lie and stand 
could be translated as se tenir couehg/allongd (be 
lying) and se tenir debout (be up) respectively, thus 
presenting a case of divergence, or they could both 
be translated into French as se tenir, thus present
ing a case of conflation, (Talmy, 1985). Depending 
on the semantics of the first argument, one might 
want to generate the divergence, (e.g., se tenir de
bout/eouche'), or not (e.g., se teniTg, thus considering 
se tcnir as a mismatch as in (1): 
(1) Pablo se tenait au milieu de la ehambre. 
(Sartre) 
(Pablo stood in the middle of the bedroom.) 
In order to account for all these language varia
tions, one cannot "freeze" the meanings of language 
pairs. In section 2.1, I show that by adopting a con
tinuum perspective, that is using a knowledge-based 
approach where I make the distinction between 
lexical and semantic knowledge, cases in between 
syntactic divergences and semantic mismatches (se 
tenir) can be accounted for in a uniform way. Prac
tically, the proposed method can be applied to in
terlingua approaches and transfer approaches, when 
these latter encode a layer of semantic information. 
1.2 The
Lexicon Representation Problem 
Within the paradigm of knowledge-based ap
proaches, there are still lexicon representation issues 
to be addressed in order to treat these language gaps. 
It has been well documented in the literature of this 
past decade that a sense enumeration approach fails 
from a theoretical point of view to capture the core 
meaning of words (e.g., (Ostler and Atkins, 1992), 
(Boguraev and Pustejovsky, 1990),...) and compli
cates from a practical viewpoint the task of NLP by 
multiplying ambiguities in analysis and choices in 
generation. 
Within Machine Translation (MT), this approach 
has led researchers to "add" ambiguity in a lan
guage which did not have it from a monolingual 
perspective. Ambignity is added at the lexical 
level within transfer based approaches ("riverl" -+ 
"rivi~re"; "river2" ~ "fleuve"); and at the semantic 
level within interlingua based approaches ("rivi~re" 
--4 RIVER DESTINATION: RIVER; "fleuve" -+ 
RIVER DESTINATION: SEA; "river" ~ RIVER 
DESTINATION: SEA, RIVER), whereas again 
"river" in English is not ambiguous with respect to 
its destination. 
In this paper, I show that ambiguity can be min
imised if one stops considering knowledge sources as 
"static" ones in order to consider them as active 
ones instead. More specifically, I show that building 
on a computational theory of lexico-semantic vague
ness and underspecification which merges computa
tional concerns with theoretical concerns enables an 
NLP system to cope with polysemy and language 
gaps in a more effective way. 
Let us consider the following simplified input se
mantics (IS): 
(2) PositionState(Thcme:Plate,Location:Table), 
This can be generated in Spanish as El plato esta 
en la mesa; where Location is lexicalised as en in 
Figure 1. 
To generate (2) into English, requires the system 
to further specify Location for English as LocCon
tact, in order to generate The plate is on the table, 
where on1 corresponds to the Spanish enl, sub-sense 
of ca, as shown in Figure 1. 
• T 
t J i 
e ~ instrum~m 
h £ ha.atum deslinatioa Rath 
} ccC°ntac' .'~ .,~ntainer /L(~C, nl .... hm(% 
......... .onl . all m2 (m2 in,,\] I aIon~: \] through\] ~j ¢na 
"~ SolJn 
_L 
Figure 1: Subset of the Semantic Types for Prepo
sitions 
From a monolingual perspective, there is no need 
to differentiate in Spanish between the 3 types of Lo
cation as LocContact, LocContainer and LocBuild
ing, a~s these distinctions are irrelevant for Span
1322 
ish analysis or generation, with respect to Figure 
1. However, within a multilingual framework, it be
comes necessary to fllrther distinguish Location, in 
order to generate English from (2). In the next sec
tions, I will show that lexical semantic hierarchies 
are better suited to account for polysemous lexemes 
than lexical or semantic hierarchies alone, for multi
lingual (and monolingual) processing. 
2 The
WYSINNWYG Approach 
I argue that treating lexical ambiguity or polysemy 
and language gaps co,nputationally requires 1) fine
grained lexical semantic type hierarchies, and 2) to 
allow words to have their meanings vary in context. 
Much effort has been lint into lexicons over the 
years, and most systems give more room to lexical 
data. However, most aI)proaches to lexicon represen
tation in NLP systems have been motivated more by 
computational concerns (economy, efficiency) than 
by the desire for a computational linguistic account, 
where the concern of explaining a i)henomenon is as 
important as tmre computational concerns. In this 
paper, I adopt a computational linguistic t)erspec
live, showing however, how these representations are 
best fitted to serve knowledge-driven NLP systems. 
2.1 A
Continuum Perspective on Language 
Gaps 
I argue that resolving language galls (divergences, 
mismatches, and cases in between) is a generation 
issue and minimally involves: 
1) using a knowledge-tlased approach to relu'esent 
the lexical semantics of lcxemes; 
2) developing a comlmtational theory of h;xico
semantic vagueness, underspecification, and 
lexical rules; 
In this paper, I only address lexical rei)resenta
tional issues, leaving the generation issues (such as 
the use of planning techniques, tile integration of the 
process in lexical choice) aside. 1 
I illustrate through some examples below, how a 
compositional semantics approach, e.g. knowledge
based, can help in dealing with language gapsY I 
will use the French (se teniT~ and English (stand, 
lie) simplified entries below, in my illustration of 
mismatches between the generator and the lexicons. 
Semantic types are coded in the sense feature: 
1Generation issues are fully discussed in (Beale and Vie
gas, 1.996). This first implementation of some language gaps 
h~ a very linfited capability for the treatment of vagueness 
and underspeeification; although it takes advantage of tim se
mantic type hierarchy, it still lacks the benefit of having the 
lexical type hierarchy presented here. 
2Note that absence of compositionality, such aus in idioms 
kick the (proverbial) bucket or syntagmatic expressions heavy 
smoker, is coded in the lexicon. 
\[key: "se-tenir3", 
form: \[orth: \[ exp: "se Zenir"\]\], 
sense: \[sem: \[name: Position-state\] .... \] 
\[key: "stand2", 
form: \[orth: \[ exp: "stand"\]\], 
sense: \[sem: \[name: PsVertical\], ...\] 
\[key: "fief", 
form: \[orth: 
sense: \[sem: 
\[ exp: "lie"\]\], 
\[name: PsHorizontal\] .... \] 
Figure 2 illustrates a subset of the Semantic Type 
Hierarchy (STH) common to all dictionaries and of 
two subsets of the Lexical Type Hierarchy (LTH) for 
French and English. 
% STIt 
°., 
PositionState 
ilorizontal Vertical 
English ....................................... : LTI-t 
........... Link between STH and LTHs 
TLink (Translation Link) between language LTHs 
Figure 2: Exmnple of an STH linked to a Fragment 
of the French and English LTHs. 
i illustrate below three main types of gaps between 
the input semantics (IS) to the generator and the 
lexicon entries (LEX) of the language in which to 
generate. I focus on the generation of the predicate: 
(i) IS LEX exact match Generating, in 
French, from the simplified IS below (3), 
(3) PositionSzaZe(agent:john,against:wall) 
is easy as there is a single French word in (3) that: lex
icalises the concept PositionState, which is se tenir. 
Therefore se tenir is generated in John se tcnait con
tre le tour (John was/(stood) against tile wall). 
1323 
(ii) IS LEX vagueness Generating, in French, 
from the partial IS below (4), 
(4) PsYertical (agent : john, against : wall) 
needs extra work from the generator, with respect 
to the lexicon entry for French. In Figure 2, one 
can see in STH that PsVertical is a sub-type of Po
sitionState, which has a mapping in LTH for French 
to se-tenir3. This illustrates a case of vagueness be
tween English and French. In this case, the gener
ator will generate the same sentence John se tenait 
contre le tour, as is the case for the exact match in 
(i). Note that generating the divergence se tenait 
debout (stand upright) although correct and gram
matical, would emphasise the position of John which 
was not necessarily focused in (4). The divergence 
can be generated by "composing" PsVertical as Po
sitionState (lexicalised as se tenir) and Vertical (lex
icalised as debout). 
(iii) IS LEX Underspeeifieation Generating, 
in French, from the partial IS below (5), 
(5) PsVertical (agent : john, against :wall, 
time:tl) & PsHorizontal(agent:john, 
against:wall,time:t2) & tl<t2 
needs extra work from the lexicon processor, with 
respect to the entries presented here, as one does 
not want to end up generating John se tint contre le 
tour puis il se tint contre lemur (John was against 
the wall then tie was against the wall). Because of 
the conjunctions here, one cannot just consider se 
tenir as vague with respect to lie and stand. This 
illustrates a lexicon in action, where the lexical pro
cessor must process se tenir as underspecified: 
PositionState ~ PsVertical V PsHorizontal 
The lexical processor will thus produce the diver
gences se tenir debout (stand) and se tenir allongd 
(lying) to generate (with some generation process
ing such as lexical choice, ellipsis, pronominalisa
tion, etc) John se tenait (&bout) contre lemur puis 
s'allongea contre lui (John was standing against the 
wall then he lied against it). 
Where the continuum perspective comes in, is that 
we do not want to "freeze" the meanings of words 
once and for all. As we just saw, in French one 
might want to generate se tenir debout or just se 
tenir depending on the semantics of its arguments 
and also depending on the context as in (5). 
In the WYSINNWYG approach, words are al
lowed to have their "meanings" vary in context. In 
other words, the literal meaning(s) coded in the lex
icon is/are the "closest" possible meaning(s) of a 
word within the STH context, and by enriching the 
discourse context (dc), one ends up "specialising" 
or "generalising" the meaning(s) of the word, using 
formally two hierarchies: semantic (STH) and lexi
cal (LTH), enabling different types of lexicon repre
sentations: vagueness, underspecification and lexical 
rules. 
2.2 A
Truly Multilingual Hierarehy 
Multilingual lexicons are usually monolingual lex
icons connected via translation links (Tlinks), 
whereas truly multilingual lexicons, as defined by 
(Cahill and Gazdar, 1995), involve n + i hierar
chies, thus involving an additional abstract hierarchy 
containing information shared by two or more lan
guages. Figure 3 illustrates the STH which is shared 
by all lexicons (French, English, Spanish, etc), and 
the lexical MLTH which involves the abstract hier
archy shared by all LTHs. 
~1'R T 
l'nlNrly 
Splli~ Rilllio./~ 
.... / 
liillg ~llrilugh 
"; '..... 
t 1 l ! ~ t ., 
.: i i .... . "., 
t ...... / !// ~ : i , '.. la~cC..l=i. L,~C.nt~i 
e i ,. , • / ' ~ ,+2 ; ..... ~ ....... 
i " '~ N/// ,, :., +L + 
/ ' B'PreP I~+ ~//~ \ '~" // /~ " 
\] engqexeme 
3_ 
Figure 3: Subset of the Multilingual Hierarchy for 
Prepositions 
The lexicons themselves are also organised as lan
guage lexical type hierarchies (Spanish LTH, English 
LTH in Figure 3). For instance, the English dictio
nary (eng-lexeme) has the English prepositions (eng
prep) as one of its sub-types, which itself has as sub
types all the English prepositions (along, through, 
on, in, ...). These prepositions have in turn sub
types (for instance, on has onl, on2, ...), which can 
themselves have subtypes (onll, on12, ...). All these 
language dependent LTHs inherit part of their infor
mation from a truly Multilingual Lexical Type tli
1324 
erarchy (MLTH), which contains information shared 
by all lexicons. There might be several levels of shar
ing, for instance, family-related languages sharing. 
Lexical types are linked to the STH via their lan
guage LTH and the MLTH, so that these lexicons 
can be used by either monolingual or multilingual 
processing. The advantages of a MTLH extend to 
1) lexicon acquisition, by allowing lexicons to inherit 
information from the abstract level hierarchy. This 
is even more useful when acquiring family-related 
languages; and 2) robustness, as the lexical proces
sors can try to "make guesses" on the assignment of 
a sense to a lexeme absent from a dictionary, based 
on similarities in morphology or orthography, with 
other family-related language lexemes. 3 
2.3 Vagueness, Underspeeifleation and 
Lexieal Rules 
The STH along with the LTH allow the lexicogra
phers to leave the meaning of some lexemes as vague 
or underspecified. The vagueness or underspecifica
tion typing allows the lexical processor to specialise 
or generalise the meaning of a lexeme, for a particu
lar task and on a needed basis. Formally, generalisa
tion and specialisation can be done in various ways, 
as specified for instance in (Kameyama et al., 1991), 
(Poesio, 1996), (Mahesh et ah, 1997). 
2.3.1 Lexicon
Vagueness 
A lexicon entry is considered as vague when its se
mantics is typed using a general monomorphic type 
covering multiple senses, as is the. case of the French 
entry "se-tenir3", or the Spanish preposition on, as 
represented in (6). 
(6) \[key: "en", 
form: \[orth: \[ exp: "en"\] .... 
sense: \[sem: \[name: Location\], ...\] 
It is at processing time, and only if needed, that 
the semantic type Location for en can be further pro
cessed as LocContact, LocContainer, ... to generate 
the English prel)ositions (on, at, ...). 
Lexicon vagueness is represented by mapping the 
citation form lex of any word x appearing in a cortms 
to a semantic monomorphic type m, which belongs 
to STH. Let us consider MAPS, the function which 
links lcx to STH, dc a discourse context, where Icx 
can appear, and ~ the immediate type/sub-type re
lation between types of STII, then: 
(7) x is vague iff 
_~rn ~ STI1 : rn = MAPS(dc, lex(x))A 
~TL,O 6 S~I'H :t~. E ~tAo E T~An ¢ oA 
Vr 6 STH : r E£ m : flq G STH : q C r 
31 have not investigated this issue yet, but see (Cahill, 
1998) for promising results with respect to making guesses on 
phonology. 
In other words, lex is vague, if m is in a type/sub
type relation with all its immediate sub-types. 
2.3.2 Lexicon
Underspeeifieation 
The meaning of a lexeme is considered as underspeci
fled when its semantics is represented via a polymor
phic type, which presents a disjunction of semantic 
types, 4 thus covering different polysemous senses, 
as is the case of the Spanish preposition "pot" in 
(8), and typical examples in lexical semantics, such 
as door which is typed as PtIYSICAL_OBJE(YI'-OR
APERTURE. a 
(8) \[key: "por", 
form: \[orth: \[ exp: "por"\] .... 
sense: \[sem: \[name: Through; Along\], ...\] 
It: is at processing time only, and on a needed ba
sis only, that the semant, ic type Through-OR-Along 
for pot can be. fllrther processed as either Through, 
or Along, ..., thus allowing the generator or analyser 
to find the appropriate representation depending on 
the task. Disambiguating "pot" to generate English, 
requires that the lexeme be eInbedded within the 
discourse context, where the filled arguments of the 
prepositions will provide semantic information un
der constraints. For instance, walk and rwcr couM 
contribute to the dismnt)iguation of pot as Along. 
Lexicon underspeeification is represented by map
ping lex (the citation form of a word x) to a semantic 
polymorphic type p, which belongs to STft, tlmn: 
(9) x is underspecified itf 
"Jp C S'FII : rn = MAPS(de, lex(x))A 
3s C ST"tI : p ~Vs A Card(s) >_ 2 
In other words, lex is underspecified, if p is a dis
jmmtion of types, and no type/sub-type relation is 
required. 
4See (Santillippo, 1998) and (Buitelaar, 1997) for different 
computational treatments of tmderspecitied representations. 
The fln'mer deals with multiple subcategorisations (whereas I 
am also interested in polysemous senses), the latter includes 
homonyms, which I agree with Pinkal (1995) should be left 
apart. 
5I believe that lexico-semantie underspecification is con
cerned with polysemous lexemes only (such as door, book, 
etc) and not homonyms (such as bank as financial-bank or 
river-bank) called lI-Type ambiguous in (l'inkal, 1995). I be
lieve the lI-Type ambiguous lexemes should be related via 
their lexical form only, while their semantic types should re
main urn'elated, i.e., there is no needs to introduce a "disjunc
tion fallacy" ~s in (Poesio, 1996). It might be the ease that 
homonyms require pragmatic underspecification as suggested, 
for instance, in (Nunberg, 1979), but in any case are beyond 
the scope of this paper, 
1325 
2.4 Lexical
Rules 
Lexical rules (LRs) are used in WYSINNWYG to 
relate systematic ambiguity to systematic polysemy. 
They seem more appropriate than underspeciflcation 
for relating the meanings of lexemes such as "lamb" 
or "haddock" which can be either of type Animal or 
Food (Fustejovsky, 1995, pp. 224). LRs and their 
application time in NLP have received a lot of at
tention (e.g., Copestake and Briscoe, 1996; Viegas et 
al., 1996), therefore, I will not develop them further 
in this paper, as the rules themselves activated by 
the lexical processor produce different entries, with 
neither type/sub-type relations nor disjunction be
tween the semantic types of the old and new en
tries. In WYSINNWYG, lexicon entries related via 
LRs are neither vague nor underspecified. For in
stance, the "grinding rule" of Copestake and Briscoe 
for linking the systematic Animal Food polysemy 
as in mutton / sheep or in French where we have a 
conflation in mouton, allows us to link the entries 
in English and sub-senses in French, without hav
ing to cope with the semantic "disjunction fallacy 
problem" of (Poesio, 1996). 
3 Conclusions
Perspectives 
I have argued for active knowledge sources 
within a knowledge-based approach, so that lexicon 
entries can be processed to best fit a particular NLP 
task. I adopted a computational linguistic perspec
tive in order to explain language phenomena such 
as language gaps and polysemy. I argued for se
mantic and lexical type hierarchies. The former is 
shared by all dictionaries, whereas the latter can be 
organised as a truly multilingual hierarchy. In that 
respect, this work differs fi'om (Han et al., 1996) 
in that I do not suggest an ontology per language, 
but argue on the contrary for one semantic hierar
chy shared by all dictionaries. 6 Other works which 
have dealt with mismatches, e.g., (Dorr and Voss, 
1998) with their interlingua and knowledge repre
sentations, (S5rasset, 1994) with his "interlingua ac
ceptations", or (Kameyama, et al, 1991) with their 
infons, cannot account for eases which lie in between 
clear-cut cases of divergences and mismatches such 
as the example "se tenir" discussed in this paper. 
I have shown that enabling lexicon entries to be 
typed as either lexically vague or underspecified, or 
linked via LRs, allows us to account for the varia
tions of word meanings in different discourse con
texts. Most of the works in computational lexical 
semantics have dealt with either underspecification 
or LRs, trying to favour one representation over the 
other. There was previously no computational treat
6ttowever, ! do not preclude that there might be different 
views on the semantic hierarchy depending on the languages 
considered: "filters" could be applied to the STtt to only show 
the relevant parts of it for some family-related languages. 
ment of lexical semantic vagueness. In discourse ap
proaches and formal semantics, the use of under
specification in terms of truth values led researchers, 
when applying their research to individual words, 
to the "disjunction fallacy problem", where a per
son who went to the bank, ended up going to the 
(financial-institution OR river-shore), whatever this 
object might be!, instead of a) going to the financial
institution OR b) going to the river-shore. 
In this paper, I have presented the usefulness of 
each representation, depending on the phenomenon 
covered. I showed the need to consider underspecifi
cation for polysemous items only, leaving homonyms 
to be related via their lexical forms only (and not 
their semantics). I believe that LRs have room for 
polysemous lexemes such as the lamb example, as 
here again one could not possibly imagine an ani
mal being (food-OR-animal) in the same discourse 
context/ 
Finally, lexieal vagueness enables a system to pro
tess lexical items from a multilingual viewpoint, 
when a lexeme becomes ambiguous with respect to 
another language. From a multingual perspective, 
there is no need to address the "sororites paradox" 
(Williamson, 1994), which tries to put a clear-cut be
tween values of the same word (e.g., not tall ... tall). 
It is important to note that WYSINNWYG accepts 
redundancy in the lexicon representations: lexemes 
call be both vague and underspecified or either one. 
One could object that the WYSINNWYG ap
proach is knowledge intensive and puts the burden 
on the lexicon, as it requires one to build several 
type hierarchies: a STH shared by all languages and 
a LTtt per language which inherits from the MLTtI. 
However, tile advantages of the WYSINNWYG ap
proach are many. First, by using the MLTIt, ac
quisition costs can be minimised, as a lot of in
formation can be inherited by lexicons of fanfily
related languages. This multilingual approach has 
been successfully applied to phonology by (Cahill 
and Gazdar, 1995). Second, tile task of determining 
the meaning of words requires human intervention, 
and thus involves some subjectivity. WYSINNWYG 
presents a good way of "reconciling" different lexi
cographers' viewpoints by allowing a lexical proces~ 
sot to specialise or generalise meanings on needed 
basis. As such, whether a lexicographer decides to 
sense-tag "en" as Location or creates the sub-senses 
"enl" and "en2" remains a virtual difference for the 
NLP system. Finally, and most important, WYSIN
NWYG presents a typing environment which ac
counts for the flexibility of word meanings in con
text, thus allowing lexicon acquirers to map words 
to their "closest" core meaning within STtt (e.g., "se 
7The fact that some cultures eat "living" creatures would 
require to type these lexemes using underspecification (food
OR-animal) instead of a lexical rule in their cultures, 
1326 
tenir" ~ PositionState) and use mechanisms (such 
as generalisation, specialisation) to modulate their 
meanings in context (e.g., "se tenir" -~ PsVertical). 
in other words, WYSINNWYG helps not only in 
sense selection but also in sense modulation. 
Further research involves investigating representa
tion formalisms, as discussed in (Briscoe et al., 1993) 
to best implement these type inheritance hierarchies. 
4 Acknowledgements

Tlfis work has been supported in l)art by DoD un
der contract number MDA-904-92-C-5189. I would 
like to thank my colleagues at; CRL for comment
ing on a former version of this paper. I am also 
gratefifl to John Barnden, Pierrette Bouillon, Boyan 
Onyshkevysh, Martha Pahner, and the anonymous 
reviewers for their usefifl comments. 

References 

S. Beale and E. Viegas. 1996. Intelligent Planning 
meets Intelligent Planners. In Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Gaps and Bridges: New DiTvctions 
in Planning and Natural Language Generation, at 
ECAI'96, Budapest, 59-64. 

B. Boguraev and J. Pustejovsky. 1990. Knowledge 
Representation and Acquisition from Dictionary. 
Coling Tutorial, Helsinki, Finland. 

T. Briscoe, V. (te Paiva and A. Copestake (eds). 
1993. Inheritance, Defaults, and the Lcxicon. 
Cambridge University Press. 

P. Buitelaar. 1997. A Lexicon for Underspecified 
Semantic Tagging. In Proceedings of the Siglex 
Workshop on Tagging Text with Lcxical Seman
tics: Why, What, and How?, Washingtoil DC. 

L. Cahill and G. Gazdar. 1995. Multilingual Lexi
cons for Related Lexicons. In Proceedings of the 
2nd DTI Language Engineering ConfeT~nce. 

L. Cahill. 1998. Automatic extension of a hierar
chical multilingual lexicon. In Proceedings of the 
Second Multilinguality in the Lexicon Workshop, 
Sl)Onsored by thc 13th biennial European Confer
ence on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI-98). 

A. Copestake and T. Briscoe. 1996. Semi
Productive Polysemy ans Sense Extension. In 
Journal of Semantics, vol.i2. 

B. Dorr. 1990. Solving Thematic Divergences in 
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 28th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa
tional Linguists. 

C. Han, F. Xia, M. Pahner, J. Rosenzweig. 1996. 
Capturing Language Specific Constraints on Lexi
eal Selection with Feature-Based Lexicalized Tree
Adjoining Grammars. in Proceedings of the Inter
national Conference on Chinese Computing Sin
gapore. 

M. Kameyama, R. Ochitani and S. Peters. 1991. Re
solving Translation Mismatches With Information 
Flow. in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Mecting 
of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 

R. Keefe and P. Sinith. (eds) 1996. Vagueness: a 
Reader'. A Bradford Book. The MIT Press. 

L. Levin and S. Nirenburg. 1993. Principles and Id
iosyncrmsies in MT Lexicons, In Proceedings of 
the I993 Spring Symposium on Building Lezicons 
for Machine TTunslation, Stanford, CA. 

K. Mahesh, S. Nirenburg and S. Beale. 1997. If 
You Itave It, Flaunt It: Using Full Ontological 
Knowledge for Word Sense Disambiguation. In 
Proceedings of the 7th International Confc~rnce 
on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Ma
chine Translation. 

G. Nunberg. 1979. The Non-uniqueness of Semantic 
Solutions: Polysemy. Lin9uistics and Philosophy 
3. 

N. Ostler and S. Atkins. 1992. Predictable mean
ing shift: Some linguistic properties of lexical im
plication rules. In Pustejovsky and Bcrgler (eds.) 
Lexical Semantics and Knowledge Representation. 
Springer Verlag. 

M. Pahner and W. Zhibiao. 1995. Verb Semantics 
for English-Chinese Translation. Machine Trans
lation, Volume 10, Nos 1-2. 

M. Pinkal. 1995. Logic and Lexicon. Oxford. 

M. Poesio. 1996. Semantic Ambiguity and Per
ceived Ambiguity. In K. van Deemter and S. Pe
t, ers (eds.) Semantic Ambiguity and Undcrspecifi
cation. 

J. Pustejovsky. 1995. The Gcnerative Lexicon. MIT 
Press. 

A. Sanfillipt)o. 1998. Lexical Underspecification and 
Word Disambiguation. In E. Viegas (ed.) Breadth 
and Depth of Semantic Lexicons. Kluwer Aca
demic l'ress. 

G. Sdrasset. 1994. SUBLIM: un syst~mc uni
vcrsel de bases lexicales multilingues et NADIA: 
sa spdcialisation aux bases lexicalcs intcrlingucs 
par acceptions. PhD. Thesis, GETA, Universit6 
de Grenoble. 

L. Tahny. 1985. Lexicalization Patterns: seman
tic structure in lexical forms. In Shopen (ed), 
Language Typology and Syntactic Description 111. 
CUP. 

E. Viegas, B. Onyshkevych, V. Raskin and S. Niren
tmrg. 1996. Ii'ionl Submit to Submitted via Sub
mission: on Lexical Rules in Large-scah; Lexicon 
Acquisition. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual 
meeting of the Association for Computational Lin
guistics, CA. 

C. Voss and B. Dorr. 1998. Lexical Allocation in IL
Based MT of Spatial Expressions. In P. Olivier 
and K.-P. Gapp (eds.) Representation and Pro
ecssing of Spatial Expressions. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 

T. Williamson. 1994. Vagueness. Routledge. 

