A Text Understander that Learns 
Udo Hahn gz Klemens Schnattinger 
Computational Linguistics Lab, Freiburg University 
Werthmannplatz 1, D-79085 Freiburg, Germany 
{hahn, schnatt inger}@coling, uni-fre±burg, de 
Abstract 
We introduce an approach to the automatic ac
quisition of new concepts from natural language 
texts which is tightly integrated with the under
lying text understanding process. The learning 
model is centered around tile 'quality' of differ
ent forms of linguistic and conceptual evidence 
which underlies the incremental generation and 
refinement of alternative concept hypotheses, 
each one capturing a different conceptual read
ing for an unknown lexical item. 
1 Introduction

The approach to learning new concepts as a 
result of understanding natural language texts 
we present here builds on two different sources 
of evidence -the prior knowledge of the do
main the texts are about, and grammatical con
structions in which unknown lexical items oc
cur. While there may be many rea+sonable inter
pretations when an unknown item occurs for the 
very first time in a text, their number rapidly 
decreases when more and more evidence is gath
ered. Our model tries to make explicit tile rea
soning processes behind this learning pattern. 
Unlike the current mainstream in automatic 
linguistic knowledge acquisition, which can be 
characterized as quantitative, surface-oriented 
bulk processing of large corpora of texts (Hin
(tie, 1989; Zernik and aacobs, 1990; Hearst, 
1992; Manning, 1993), we propose here a 
k++owledge-intensive model of concept learning 
from few, positive-only examples that is tightly 
integrated with tile non-learning mode of text 
understanding. Both learning and understand
ing build on a given core ontology in tile format 
of terminological assertions and, hence, make 
abundant use of terminological reasoning. The 
'plain' text understanding mode can be consid
ered as tile instantiation and continuous filling 
y M+t hi~ 
Figure 1: Architectnre of the Text Learner 
of roles with respect to single concepts already 
available ill tile knowledge base. Under learning 
conditions, however, a set of alternative concept 
hypotheses has to be maintained for each nn
known item, with each hypothesis denoting a 
newly created conceptual interpretation tenta
tively associated with tile unknown item. 
Tile underlying methodology is summarized 
in Fig. 1. Tile text parser (for an overview, cf. 
BrSker et al. (1994)) yields information from 
tile grammatical constructions in which an un
known lexical item (symbolized by the black 
square) occurs in terms of the corresponding de
pendency parse tree. The kinds of syntactic coll
structions (e.g., genitive, apposition, compara
tive), in which unknown lexical items appear, 
are recorded and later assessed relative to the 
credit they lend to a particular hypothesis. The 
conceptual interpretation of parse trees involv
ing unknown lexical items in the domain knowl
e@e base leads to the derivation of concept hy
potheses, which are further enriched by concep
tual annotations. These reflect structurM pat
terns of consistency, mutual justification, anal
ogy, etc. relative to already available concept 
descriptions in the domain knowledge base or 
other hypothesis spaces. This kind of initial ev
idence, in particular its predictive "goodness" 
for tile learning task, is represented by corre
sponding sets of linguistic and concepZual qual
476 ,-S%~~ian tics 
C rq D C z N D z 
C kJ D C z U D z 
V.R.C {~le~X z I\]~Z(d) CC z} 
-RnS Rz nS z 
clI  zldCU} {(d,d')ciV 
Ta, ble 1: Solne Concept and 
Role Terms 
Axiom Semantics 
A C A z = C z 
a : C a z 6 C z 
QR QZ = Rz 
a I~b (a z,b z) ER z 
Table 2: Axioms for 
"q S Concept. and Roles 
ity labels. Multiple concept hyt)otheses tbr each 
unknown lexical item are organized in terms of 
corresponding hypothesis spaccs, each of which 
holds differe.nt or further specialized conceptual 
readings. 
The quality machine estimates the overall 
credibility of single concept hyl)otheses by tak
ing tile available set of quality labels for each 
hypothesis into account. The linal computa
tion of' a preference order for tile entire set of 
competing hypotheses takes place ill the qual
ifier, a termi,lological classifier extended by an 
evaluation metric for quality-based selection cri
teria. The output of the quality machine is a 
ranked list of concept hypothe.ses. The ranking 
yields, in decreasing order of signiticance, either 
the most plausible concel)t classes which classify 
the considered instance or more general concept 
classes subsuming the considered concept class 
(cf. Schnattinger and llahn (1998) for details). 
2 Methodological
Framework 
In this section, we present the major method
ological decisions underlying our at)proach. 
2.1 Terminological
Logics 
We use a standard terminological, Kb-ONE
style concept description language, here referred 
to as C~D£ (for a survey of this paradigm, cf. 
Woods and Schmolze (1992)). It has several 
constructors combining atomic concepts, roles 
and individuals to define the terminologicM the
ory of a domain. Conccpts are unary predicates, 
rolcs are binary predicates over a domain A, 
with individuals being the elelnents of A. We 
~ssume a common set-theoretical semantics for 
(?7)£ an interpretation Z is a function that 
assigns to each concept symbol (the set A) a 
subset of the domain A, 27 : A -4 2 A, to each 
role symbol (the set P) a binary relation of A, 
Z : P ~ 2 AxA, and to each individual symbol 
(the set I) an element of A, I : I -9 A. 
Concept terms and role terms are defined in
ductively. Table 1 contains some constructors 
and their semantics, where C and D denote con
cept tin'ms, while R and S denote roles, l{ z (d) 
represents tile set of role fillers of tile individual 
d, i.e., the set of' individuals c with (d, c) E t{ z. 
By means of terminological axioms (for a sub
set, see Table 2) a symbolic name can be intro
duced for each concept to which are assigned 
necessary and sufticient constraints using the 
definitional operator'"=. A finite set of such 
axioms is called the terminology or TBoz. Con
cepts and roles are associated with concrete in
divkhlals by assertional axioms (see Ta.ble 2; a, b 
denote individuals). A tinite set of such axioms 
is called the world description or ABox. An in
terpretation Z is a model of all ABox with re
gard to a TBox, iff Z satisfies the assertioual 
and terminological axioms. 
Cons,dining, e.g., ~ phrase such as 'The 
switch of the Itoh-Ci-8 ..', a straightforward 
translation into corresponding terminological 
concet)t descriptions is illustrated 1)3,: 
(Pl) switch.l : Swn'cn 
(P2) Itoh-Ci-8 hAS-SWITCh switch.1 
(pa) tlAS-SW1TCII 
(OuTPu'rDtgv U 1NPUTI)tgV LI \]IIAS-I'ARTISwl'rCH 
STORAGEDEV U COMPUTER) 
Assertion Pl indicates that the instance 
switch.1 belongs to tile concept class SWlq'Cn. 
P2 relates \]toh-Ci-8 and switch.1 via the re
lation tIAS-SWlTCIt. The relation tlAS-SWITCtt 
is defined, finally, as the set of all IIAS-PAf{T 
relations which have their domain restricted to 
the disjunction of the concepts OUTPUTDEV, 
INPUTI)EV, STORAGE\])EV or COMPUTEII and 
dmir range restricted to SW1TCtI. 
In order to represent and reason about COl> 
cept hypotheses we have to properly extend tl~e 
formalism of CD£. Terminological hypotheses , 
in our framework, are characterized by the fol
lowing properties: for all stipulated hypotheses 
(1) the same domain A holds, (2) the same co,> 
cept definitions are used, and (3) only different 
a~ssertionM axioms can be established. '\]'hese 
conditions are sufficient, because each hyl)oth
esis is based on a unique discourse entity (cf. 
(1)), which ca.n be directly mapped to associ
ated instances (so concept definitions are stable 
(2)). Only relations (including the lsa-relation) 
~mong the instances may be different (3). 
477 
Axiom Semantics 
(a : C)t, a z e C z" 
(~ R b)h (a z, b z) ~ rF~ 
Table 3: Axioms in CD£ hvv° 
Given these constraints, we may annotate 
each assertional axiom of the form'a : C' and 
'a R b' by a corresponding hypothesis label h so 
that (a :O)h and (a R b)h are valid terminolog
ical expressions. The extended terminolo~;ical 
language (cf. Table 3) will be called 02?£ avp°. 
Its semantics is given by a special interpreta
tion function Zh for each hypothesis h, which is 
applied to each concept and role symbol in the 
canonical way: Zh : A --+ 2A; Zh : P -+ 2 AxA. 
Notice that the instances a, b are interpreted by 
the interpretation function 27, because there ex
ists only one domain A. Only tile interpretation 
of the concept symbol C and the role symbol R 
may be different in each hypothesis h. 
Assume that we want to represent two of tile 
four concept hyt)otheses that call be derived 
from (p3), viz. Itoh-Ci-8 considered as a storage 
device or an output device. The corresponding 
ABox expressions are then given by: 
(Itoh-Ci-8 ItAS-SWITCH switch.1)h~ 
(ltoh-Ci-8 : STOP~AGEDEV)h, 
(Itoh-Ci-8 IIAS-SWlTCH switch.1)ha 
(Itoh-Ci-8 : OUTPUTDEv)h2 
The semantics associated with this ABox 
fragment has the following form: 
Zh, 0IAS-SWlTCII) = {(Itoh-Ci-8, switch.I)}, 
~Thl (STOaAGED~;v) = {Itoh-Ci-8}, 
Zh, (OuTPUTDEV) = (~ 
Zhz (HAS-SWITCH) = { (Itoh-Ci-8, switch. I) }, 
Zh~(STORAGEDEV) = O, 
Zhf(OuTPUTDEV) = {Itoh-Ci-8} 
2.2 Hypothesis
Generation Rules 
As mentioned above, text parsing and con
cept acquisition from texts are tightly coupled. 
Whenever, e.g., two nominals or a nominal and 
a verb are supposed to be syntactically related 
in the regular parsing mode, tile semantic in
terpreter simultaneously evaluates tile concep
tual compatibility of tile items involved. Since 
these reasoning processes are fully embedded in 
a terminological representation system, checks 
are made as to whether a concept denoted by 
one of these objects is allowed to fill a role of 
the other one. If one of the items involved is 
unknown, i.e., a lexical and conceptual gap is 
encountered, this interpretation mode generates 
initial concept hypotheses about tile class mem
bership of the unknown object, and, as a conse
quence of inheritance mechanisms holding for 
concept taxonomies, provides conceptual role 
information for the unknown item. 
Given the structural foundations of termi
nological theories, two dimensions of concep
tual learning can be distinguished -the tax
onomic one by which new concepts are located 
in conceptual hierarchies, and tile aggregational 
one by which concepts are supplied with clus
ters of conceptual relations (these will be used 
subsequently by the terminological classifier to 
determine the current position of tile item to 
be learned in tile taxonomy). In the follow
ing, let target.con be an unknown concept de
noted by the corresponding lexical item tar
get.lex, base.con be a given knowledge base con
cept denoted by the corresponding lexical item 
base.lcx, and let tawet.Iex and base.lex be re
lated by some dependency relation. Further
more, in the hypothesis generation rules below 
variables are indicated by names with leading 
'?'; the operator TELL is used to initiate tile 
creation of a ssertional axioms in C2)£ hyp°. 
Typical linguistic indicators that call be ex
ploited for taxonomic integration are apposi
tions ('.. the printer @A@ ..'), exemplification 
phrases ('.. printers like the @A @ .. ') or nomi
nal compounds ('.. the @A©printer .. 9. These 
constructions ahnost unequivocally determine 
'@A~' (targct.lez) when considered as a proper 
name I to denote an instance ofa PRtNTER (tar
get.con), given its characteristic dependency re
lation to 'printer' (base.lex), the conceptual cor
relate of which is the concept class PalNTEa 
(base.con). This conclusion is justified indepen
dent of conceptual conditions, simply due to the 
nature of these linguistic constructions. 
The generation of corresponding concept hy
potheses is achieved by the rule sub-hypo (Ta
ble 4). Basically, the type of target.con is carried 
over from base.con (function Wpe-of). hi addi
tion, the syntactic label is ~serted which char
acterizes the grammatical construction figuring 
as the structural source for that particular hy
1Such a part-of-speech hypothesis can be derived 
fl'om the inventory of valence and word order specifi
cations underlying the dependency grammar model we 
use (BrSker et al., 1994). 
478 
sub-hypo (target.con, base.con, h, litbel) 
?type := type-of(base.con) 
TELL (taryet.con : ?type)h 
add-label ( (tar qet.con : ?type)h, label) 
Table 4: Taxonomic llypothesis Generation Rule 
pothesis (h denotes tile identitier lbr the selected 
hypothesis space), e.g., AP POSITION, EXEM P LI
FICATION, or NCOMPOUND. 
The aggrcyational dimension of terminologi
cal theories is addressed, e.g., by grammatical 
constructions causing case frame assignments. 
In the example '.. @B@ is equippcd with 32 MB 
of RAM ..', role filler constraints of the verb 
form 'cquippcd' that relate to its PATIENT role 
carry over to '~.q3@'. After subsequent seman
tic interpretation of the entire verbal complex, 
'((:~B~' may be anything that can be equipt)ed 
with memory. Constructions like prepositional 
phrases ('.. @C@ flwn IIgM .. ') or genitives ('.. 
H\]M's @C@ ..) in which either targct.lez or 
base.low occur as head or modifier have a simi
lar effect. Attachments of prepositional phrases 
or relations among nouns in genitives, however, 
open a wider interpretation space for ~c~C~' 
than for '(~B@', since verbal case frames provide 
a higher role selectivity than PP attachments 
or, even more so, genitive NPs. So, any concept 
that can reasonably be related to tile concept 
IBM will be considered a potential hyl)othesis 
for %~C(~b', e.g., its depa.rtments, products, For
tune 500 ranking. 
Generalizing from these considerations, we 
state a second hyl)othesis generation rule which 
accounts for aggregational patterns of concept 
learning. The basic assumption behind this 
rule, perm-hypo (cf. Table 5), is that targct.cmz 
tills (exactly) one of the n roles of base.con it 
is currently permitted to fill (this set is deter
mined by tile function perm-filler), l)epend
ing on the actual linguistic construction one en
counters, it may occur, in particular for PP 
and NP constructions, that one cannot decide 
on the correct role yet;. Consequently, several 
alternative hypothesis spaces are opened and 
target.con is assigned as a potential tiller of 
the i-th role (taken from ?roleSet, the set of 
admitted roles) in its corresponding hypothesis 
space. As a result, the classifier is able to de
rive a suitable concept hypothesis by specializ
ing target.coTt according to the value restriction 
of base.con's i-th role. The function member-of 
perm-hypo ( tar get.co~z, ~-asc.con, h, label)
?roleSet :=perra-f iller( targct.con, base.cm~, It) 
?r := l?roleSetl 
FORALL ?i :=?r DOWNTO 1 DO 
? rolei := member-of ( ?roleSet ) 
?roleSet :=?roleSet \ {?rolei} 
IF ?i = 1 
THEN ?hypo := h 
ELSE ?hypo := gen-hypo(h) 
TELL (base.con ?rolei lar(qet.co'lt).?hypo 
add-label ((base.con ?rolei taryet.con)%Vz, o, label) 
Table 5: Aggregational IIypothesis Generation Rule 
selects a role from the set ?roleSet; gen-hypo 
creates a new hypothesis space by asserting 
the given axioms of h and outputs its identi
tier. Thereupon, the hypothesis space identified 
by ?hgpo is augmented through a TELL oI> 
eration by the hypothesized assertion. As for 
sub-hypo, perm-hypo assigns a, syntactic qual
ity label (function add-label) to each i-th hy
pothesis indicating the type of syntactic con
struction in which target.lez and base.lex are 
rela.ted in the text, e.g., CAS\[.;|"RAME, I'PA~r
TACIt or (.~ENlrI'IVENI). 
Getting back to our example, let us assume 
that the target ltoh-Ci-8 is predicted already as 
a PRODUCT as a result of preceding interpreta
tion processes, i.e., Itoh-Ci-8 : PI{O1)UCT holds. 
l,et PI',ODUCq' be defined as: 
PRODUCT 
VIIAS-t'AI{T.I)IIYSICALOBJECT \[7 VI\[AS-SIZE.~IZE \[7 
VHAS-PRICI~;.PRICI~; UI VIIAS-WEIGIVI'.\¥EIGIIT 
At this level of conceptual restriction, four 
roles have to be considered for relating the tar
get Itoh-Ci-8 as a tentative PROI)UCT to 
the base concept SWITCI| when interpreting the 
phrase 'The switch of the Itoh-Ci-8 .. '. Three of 
them~ tlAS-SIZE~ ltAS-PRICE, and IIAS-WEIGIIT~ 
are ruled out due to the violation of a simple 
integrity constraint ('switch'does not denote a 
measure unit). Therefore, only the role IIAS
PAICI' must be considered in terms of the exl)res
sion Itoh-Ci-8 ItAS-t'ART switch. 1 (or, equiva
lently, switch.1 I,APJr--oI.' ltoh-Ci-8). Due to the 
definition of HaS-SWI'rcH (of. P3, Subsection 
2.1), the instantiation of HAS-PAler is special
ized to IIAS-SWITC\[1 by the classifier, since the 
range of the tlAS-I'AItT relation is aJready re
stricted to SwH'cn (Pl). Since the classifier ag~ 
gressively pushes hypothesizing to be maximally 
specific, the disjunctive concept referred to ill 
479 
the domain restriction of the role HAS-SWITCH 
is split into four distinct hypotheses, two of 
which are sketched below. Hence, we assume 
Itoh-Ci-8 to denote either a STORAGEDEvice 
or an OUTPUTDEViee or an INPUTDEvice or a 
COMPUTER (note that we also include parts of 
the Is-a hierarchy in the example below). 
(Itoh-Ci-8 : STORAGEDEV)hl, 
(Itoh-Ci-8 : DEVICE)h~, .., 
(Itoh-Ci-8 HAS-SWITCH switch.1)h, (Itoh-Ci-8 
: OUTPUTDEV)h2, 
(lloh-Ci-8 : DEVlCE)h2, .., 
(Itoh-Ci-8 HAS-SWITCH switch.1)h~ .... 
2.3 Hypothesis
Annotation Rules 
In this section, we will focus on the quality as
sessment of concept hypotheses which occurs at 
the knowledge base level only; it is due to the 
operation of hypothesis annotation rules which 
continuously evaluate the hypotheses that have 
been derived fi'om linguistic evidence. 
The M-Deduction rule (see Table 6) is trig
gered for any repetitive assignment of the same 
role filler to one specific conceptual relation that 
occurs in different hypothesis spaces. This rule 
captures the assulnption that a role filler which 
has been multiply derived at different occasions 
must be granted more strength than one which 
has been derived at a single occasion only. 
EXISTS ol,o2,R, hl,h2 : 
(ol /~ O~)h~ /X (o~ /~ o~.)h~ /X h~ ¢ h2 
TELL (O 1 ~r~ O2)/,, : hi-DEDUCTION 
Table 6: Tile Rule M-Deduction 
Considering our example at the end of subsec
tion 2.2, for 'Itoh-Ci-8' the concept hypotheses 
STORAGEDEV and OUTPUTDEV were derived 
independently of each other in different hypoth
esis spaces. Itence, DEVICE as their common 
supereoncept has been multiply derived by the 
classifier in each of these spaces a.s a result of 
transitive closure computations, too. Accord
ingly, this hypothesis is assigned a high degree 
of confidence by the classifier which derives the 
conceptual quality label M-DEDUCTION: 
(Itoh-Ci-8 : DEVICE)h, A (ltoh-Ci-8 : DEVlCE)h~ 
(Itoh-Ci-8: DEVICE)h, : M-DEDUCTION 
The C-Support rule (see Table 7) is triggered 
whenever, within tile same hypothesis space, 
a hypothetical relation, R1, between two in
stances can be justified by another relation, R2, 
involving the same two instances, but where the 
role fillers occur in 'inverted' order (R1 and R2 
need not necessarily be semantically inverse re
lations, as with 'buy' and 'sell). This causes 
the generation of the quality label C-SUPPORT 
which captures the inherent symmetry between 
concepts related via quasi-inverse relations. 
EXISTS ol, 02, R1, f~2, h : 
(o~ I~ O2)h A (o2 I~2 0~)h A 1~1 ¢ t~2 
TELL (Ol R1 O2)h :C-SuPPORT 
Table 7: Tile Rule C-Support 
Example: 
(Itoh SELLS Itoh-Ci-8)h A 
(Itoh-Ci-8 DEVELOPED-BY Itoh)h 
(itoh SELLS Itoh-Ci-8)h : C-SuPPORT 
Whenever an already filled conceptual rela
tion receives an additional, yet different role 
filler in the same hypothesis space, the Add
Filler rule is triggered (see Table 8). This 
application-speciIic rule is l)articularly suited to 
our natural language understanding task and 
has its roots in the distinction between manda
tory and optional case roles for (ACTION) verbs. 
Roughly, it yields a negative assessment in 
terms of the quality label ADDFILLER for any 
attempt to fill the same mandatory case role 
more than once (unless coordinations are in
volved). In contradistinction, when the same 
role of a non-ACTION concept (typically de
noted by nouns) is multiply filled we assign the 
positive quality label SUPPORT, since it reflects 
the conceptual proximity a relation induces on 
its component fillers, provided that they share 
a common, non-acTiON concept class. 
EXISTS Ol, o2, o3, It, h : 
(O 1 R 02)1, /~ (O 1 P~ o3)1, A (o 1 : ACTION)h ==¢" 
TELL (Ol R o2)/, : ADDFILLER 
Table 8: The Rule AddFiller 
We give examples both for tile assignment of 
an ADDFILLER as well as for a SUPPORT label: 
Examples: 
(produces.1 : ACTION)h A 
(produces.1 AGENT Itoh)h A 
(produces.1 AGENT IBM)a 
(produces.1 AGENT Itoh)h : ADDFILLER 
(Itoh-Ci-8:PRINTElt)h A (ltoh-Ct : PRINTER)h A 
(Itoh SELLS Itoh-Ci-8)h A (Iloh SEI,LS itoh-Ct)h A 
(ltoh :-~AcTION)h 
(Itoh-Ci-8: PRINTElt)h : SUPPORT 
480 
2.4 Quality
Dimensions 
The criteria from which concept hypotheses 
are derived differ in the dimension from which 
they are drawn (grammatical vs. conceptual ev
ide,lce), as well as tile strength by which they 
lend support to the corresponding hypotheses 
(e.g., apposition vs. genitive, multiple deduc
tion vs. additional role filling, etc.). In order 
to make these distinctions explicit we have de
veloped a "quality calculus" at the core of which 
lie the definition of and inference rules for qual
ity labels (cf. Schnattinger and tlahn (1998) for 
more details). A design methodology for specific 
quality calculi may proceed along the follow
ing lines: (1) Define the dimensions from which 
quality labels can be drawn. In our a pt)lication, 
we chose tile set/2Q := {ll, • •., 1,,,} of linguistic 
quality labels and CQ := {Cl,...,c,~} of con
cel)tual quality labels. (2) Determine a partial 
orderi'n 9 p among the quality labels fl'om one di
mension rettecting different degrees of strength 
among the quality labels. (3) Determine a total 
ovderin 9 among the dimensions. 
In our application, we have empirical evi
dence to grant linguistic criteria priority over 
conceptual ones. llence, we state the following 
constraint: Vl E £ Q, Vc E C Q : l > o c 
The dinmnsion 12~. Linguistic quality labels 
reflect structuraJ properties of phra.sal patterns 
or discourse contexts in which unknown lexi
ca l items occur 2 -we here assume that the 
type of" granamatical construction exercises a 
particular interpretative force on tile unknown 
item and, at the same time, yields a particu
lar level of credibility for the hypotheses being 
derived. Taking the considerations from Sub
section 2.2 into account, concrete examples of 
high-quality labels are given by APPOSITION or 
NCOMPOUND labels. Still of good quality but 
aJready less constraining are occurrences of the 
unknown item in a CASEFRAME construction. 
l:inMly, in a PPATTACH or GENI'rIvENP coil
struction tile unknown lexical item is still less 
constrained. IIence, at tile quality level, these 
latter two labels (just as tile first two labels we 
considered) form an equivalence class whose eb 
ements cannot be further discriminated. So we 
end up with the following quality orderings: 
2In the future, we intend to integrate additional types 
of constraints, e.g., quality criteria reflecting the degree 
of completeness vs. partiality of the parse. 
NCOMPOUND ~p APPOSITION 
NCOMPOUND ~>p CASI,'FRAMt~ 
APPOSITION >p CASEFRAIvlE 
CASEI~RAME >p GENITIVENP 
CASEFRAME ~p PPATTACII 
Gt~.NrrlvENP =p PPATTACH 
The dimension CQ. Conceptual quality labels 
result from comparing the conceptual represen
tation structures of a concept hypothesis with 
already existing representation structures in the 
underlying domain knowledge base or other con
cept hypotheses from the viewpoint of struc
tural similarity, compatibility, etc. The closer 
the match, the more credit is lent to a hypoth
esis. A very positive conceptual quality label, 
e.g., is M-DEI)UCTION, whereas ADDIPlLLEII is 
a negative one. Still positive strength is ex
pressed by SUPPORT or C-SuPPO~t'p, both being 
indistinguishable, however, from a quality point 
of view. Accordingly, we may state: 
~/I-DEI)UCTION ~>p ~UI't'ORT 
M.-DEDuCTION ~>p C-SUPPOICI" 
SUPPORT zp C-SUPPORT 
SUPPORT ),p AI)D f"II,LEI{ 
C-SuPPORT >P ADD I~'II'LER 
2.5 Hypothesis
Ranking 
Each new chic available for a target concept to 
be learned results in the generation of ad(litional 
linguistic or conceptual quality labels. So hy
pothesis spaces get incrementally augmented by 
quality statements. In order to select tile most 
credible one(s) among them we apply a two-step 
procedure (tile details of which are explained 
ill Schnattinger and Ilahn (1998)). First, those 
concept hypotheses are chosen which have ac
cumulated the greatest amount of high-quality 
labels according to tile linguistic dimension £Q. 
Second, further hypotheses are selected from 
this linguistically plausible candidate set based 
on the quality ordering underlying CQ. 
We have also made considerable efforts to 
evaluate the performance of the text learner 
based on the quality calculus. In order to ac
count for the incrementality of the learning pro
cess, a new evaluation measure capturing the 
system's on-line learning accuracy was defined, 
which is sensitive to taxonomic hierarchies. The 
results we got were consistently favorable, as 
our system outi)erformed those closest in spirit, 
CAMILLE (tlastings, 1996) and Sclsotl (Rau et 
481 
al., 1989), by a gain in accuracy on the or
der of 8%. Also, the system requires relatively 
few hypothesis spaces (2 to 6 on average) and 
prunes the concept search space radically, re
quiring only a few examples (for evaluation de
tails, cf. Hahn and Schnattinger (1998)). 
3 Related
Work 
We are not concerned with lexical acquisition 
from very large corpora using surface-level collo
cational data as proposed by Zernik and Jacobs 
(1990) and Velardi et al. (1991), or with hy
ponym extraction based on entirely syntactic 
criteria as in Hearst (1992) or lexico-semantic 
associations (e.g., Resnik (1992) or Sekine et al. 
(1994)). This is mainly due to the fact that 
these studies aim at a shallower level of learn
ing (e.g., selectionM restrictions or thematic re
lations of verbs), while our focus is on much 
more fine-grained conceptual knowledge (roles, 
role filler constraints, integrity conditions). 
Our approach bears a close relationship, how
ever, to the work of Mooney (1987), Berwick 
(1989), Rat, eL al. (1989), Gomez and Segami 
(1990), and Hastings (1996), who all aim at the 
automated learning of word meanings from con
text using a knowledge-intensive approach. But 
our work differs from theirs in that the need to 
cope with several competing concept hypotheses 
and to aim at a rcason-based selection in terms 
of the quality of arguments is not an issue in 
these studies. Learning fl'om real-world texts 
usually provides the learner with only sparse 
and fragmentary evidence, such that multiple 
hypotheses are likely to be derived and a need 
for a hypothesis evaluation arises. 
4 Conclusion

We have introduced a solution for the semantic 
acquisition problem on the basis of the auto
matic processing of expository texts. The learn
ing methodology we propose is based on the 
incremental assignment and evaluation of the 
quality of linguistic and conceptual evidence for 
emerging concept hypotheses. No specialized 
learning algorithm is needed, since learning is 
a reasoning task carried out by the classifier 
of a terminological reasoning system. However, 
strong heuristic guidance for selecting between 
plausible hypotheses comes from linguistic and 
conceptual quality criteria. 
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank 
our colleagues in the CLIF group for fruitflll discus
sions, in particular Joe Bush who polished the text 
as a native speaker. I(. Schnattinger is supported by 
a grant from DFG (Ha 2097/3-1). 

References 

R. Berwick. 1989. Learning word meanings from examples. In D. Waltz, editor, Semantic Structures., pages 89-124. Lawrence Erlbaum. 

N. BrSker, U. tIahn, and S. Schacht. 1994. Concurrent lexicalized dependency parsing: the PARSETALK model. Ill Proc. of the COLING'94. Vol.1, pages 379-385. 

F. Gomez and C. Segami. 1990. Knowledge acquisition from natural language for expert systems based on classification problem-solving methods. Knowledge Acquisition, 2(2):107-128. 

U. IIahn and K. Schnattinger. 1998. Towards text knowledge engineering. In Proc. of the AAAI'98. 

P. Hastings. 1996. Implications of an automatic lexical acquisition system. In S. Wermter, E. lq.iloff, and G. Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Statistical and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing, pages 261-274. Springer. 

M. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora. In Proc. of the COLING'92. Vol.2, pages 539-545. 

D. Hindle. 1989. Acquiring disambiguation rules from text. In Proc. of the ACL'89, pages 26-29. 

C. Manning. 1993. Automatic acquisition of large subcategorization dictionary from corpora. In Proc. of the A CL'93, pages 235-242. 

R. Mooney. 1987. Integrated learning of words and their underlying concepts. In Proc. of the CogSci'87, pages 974-978. 

L. Rau, p. aacobs, and U. Zernik. 1989. Information extraction and text summarization using linguistic knowledge acquisition. Information Processing $J Management, 25(4):419-428. 

P. Resnik. 1992. A class-based approach to lexical discovery. In Proe. of the A CL '92, pages 327-329. 

K. Schnattinger and U. Hahn. 1998. Quality-based learning. In Proc. of the ECAI'98, pages 160-164. 

S. Sekine, J. Carroll, S. Ananiadou, and J. Tsujii. 1994. Automatic learning for semantic collocation. In Proc. of the ANLP'9/t, pages 104-110. 

P. Velardi, M. Pazienza, and M. Fasolo. 1991. How to encode semantic knowledge: a method for meaning representation and computer-aided acquisition. Computational Linguistics, 17:153-170. 

W. Woods and J. Schmolze. 1992. The KL-ONE family. Computers ~ Mathematics with Applications, 23(2/5):133-177. 

U. Zernik and P. Jacobs. 1990. Tagging for learning: collecting thematic relations from corpus. In Proe. of the COLING'90. Vol.1, pages 34-39. 

