Flow Network Models for Word Alignment and Terminology 
Extraction from Bilingual Corpora 
I~ric Gaussier 
Xerox Research Centre Europe 6, Chemin de Maupertuis 3S240 Meylan F. 
Eric.Gaussier~xrce.xerox.com 
Abstract 
This paper presents a new model for word align
ments between parallel sentences, which allows 
one ~o accurately estimate different parameters, 
in a computationally efficient way. An applica
tion of this model to bilingual terminology ex
traction, where terms are identified in one lan
guage and guessed, through the alignment pro
cess, in the other one, is also described. An ex
periment conducted on a small English-French 
parallel corpus gave results with high precision, 
demonstrating the validity of the model. 
1 Introduction

l?\[arly works, (Gale and Church, 1993; Brown 
et el., 1993), and to a certain extent (Kay and 
RSscheisen, 1993), presented methods to ex
t,'act b!Ji!!gua! lexicons of words from a parallel 
corpus, relying on the dist:ribu;ioa of tl:e wo:ds 
in the set of parallel sentences (or other units). 
(Brown et el., 1993) then extended their method 
and established a sound probabilistic model se
ries, relying on different parameters describing 
how words within parallel sentences are aligned 
to each other. On the other hand, (Dagan et 
el., 1993) proposed an algorithm, borrowed to 
the field of dynamic programming and based on 
the output of their previous work, to find the 
best alignment, subject to certain constraints, 
between words in parallel sentences. A simi
lar algorithm was used by (Vogel et el., 1996). 
Investigating alignments at the sentence level 
allows to clean and to refine the leMcons other
wise extracted from a parallel corpus as a whole, 
pruning what (Melamed, 1996) calls "indirect 
associations". 
Now, what differentiates the models and algo
rithms proposed are the sets of parameters and 
constraints they rely on, their ability to find an 
appropriate solution under the constraints de
fined and their ability to nicely integrate new 
parameters. We want to present here a model of 
the possible alignments in the form of flow net
works. This representation allows to define dif
ferent kinds of alignments and to find the most 
probable or an approximation of this most prob
able alignment, under certain constraints. Our 
procedure presents the advantage of an accurate 
modelling of the possible alignments, and can be 
used on small corpora. We will introduce this 
model in the next section. Section 3 describes a 
particular use of this model to find term trans
lations, and presents the results we obtained for 
this task on a small corpus. Finally, the main 
features of our work and the research directions 
we envisage are summarized in the conlcusion. 
2 Alignments
and flow networks 
Let us ~irst consider the following a!igIled 
sentences, with the actual alignment beween 
words~: 
X X 
Assuming that we have probabilities of associ
ating English and French words, one way to find 
the preceding alignment is to search for the most 
1All the examples consider English and French ;ts tile 
source and target languages, even though the method 
we propose is independent of the language pair tinder 
consideration 
444 
probable alignment under the constraints that 
any given English (resp. French) word is asso
ciated to one and only one French (resp. En
glish) word. We can view a connection between 
an English and a French word as a flow going 
from an English to a French word. The preced
ing constraints state that the outgoing flow of 
a.n English word and the ingoing one of a French 
word must equal 1. We also have connections 
entering the English words, from a source, and 
leaving the French ones, to a sink, to control the 
flow quantity we want to go through the words. 
2.1 Flow
networks 
We meet here the notion of flow networks that 
we can formalise in the following way (we as
sume that the reader has basic notions of graph 
theory). 
Definition 1: let G = (V,E) be a directed 
connected graph with m edges. A flow in G is 
a vector 
(where T denotes the transpose of a matrix) 
s,tch as, for each vertex i ~ V: 
1) 
where ~'+(i) denotes the set of edges entering 
vertex i, wherea.s c~-(i) is the set of edges leav
ing vertex i. 
We can, furthermore, associate to each edge it 
of G = (V,E) two numbers, b~ and c~ with 
b,, < c~, which will be called the lower capac
ity bound and the upper capacity bound of the 
edge. 
Definition 2: let G = (V,E) be a directed 
connected graph with lower and upper capacity 
bounds. We will say that a flow 9o in G is a 
feasible flow in G if it satisfies the following 
capacity constraints: 
Finally, let us associate to each edge u of a di
rected connected graph G = (V, E) with capac
ity intervals \[bG c~\] a cost 7~, representing the 
cost (or inversely the probability) to use this 
edge in a flow. We can define the total cost, 
7 x ~2, associated to a flow ~2 in G as follows: 
u6E 
Definition 3: let G = (V,E) be a connected 
graph with capacity intervals \[b,~; c,,\], u C/5 and 
costs 7,, u ~ E. We will call minimal cost 
flow the feasible flow in G for which 7 × ~ is 
minimal. 
Several algorithms have been proposed to com
pute the minimal cost flow when it exists. We 
will not detail them here but refer the interested 
reader to (Ford and Fulkerson, 1962; Klein, 
1967). 
2.2 Alignment
models 
Flows and networks define a general framework 
in which it is possible to model alignments be
tween words, and to find, under certain con
straints, the best alignment. We present now 
an instance of such a model, where the only pa
rameters involved are association probabil
ities between English and French words, and 
in which we impose that any English, respec
tively French word, has to be aligned with one 
and only one French, resp. English, word, possi
bly empty. We can, of course, consider different 
constraints. The constraints we define, though 
they would yield to a complex computation for 
the EM algorithm, do not privilege any direc
tion iv. an underlying translation process. 
This model defines for each pair of aligned 
sentences a graph G(V, E) as follows: 
• V comprises a source, a sink, all the English 
and French words, an empty English word, 
and an empty French word, 
• E comprises edges from the source to all the 
English words (including the empty one), 
edges from all the French words (including 
the empty one) to the sink, an edge from 
the sink to the source, and edges fl'om all 
English words (including the empty one) to 
all the French words (including the empty 
one) 2 . 
• from the source to all possible English 
words (excluding the empty one), the ca
pacity interval is \[1;1\], 
2The empty words account for the fact that words 
may not be aligned with other ones, i.e. they are not 
explicitely translated for example. 
445 
• front the source to the empty English word, 
the capacity interval is \[O;max(l~,ly)\], 
where l/ is the number of French words, 
and l~ the number of English ones, 
• from the English words (including the 
empty one) to the French words (includ
ing the empty one), the capacity interval is 
\[0;1\], 
• from the French words (excluding the 
empty one) to the sink, the capacity inter
val is \[I;i\], 
• from the empty French word to the sink, 
the capacity interval is \[0; rna.z'(le, l\])\], 
• fl'om the sink to the source, the capacity 
interval is \[0; max(l~, t/)\]. 
Once such a graph has been defined, we have 
to assign cost values to its edges, to reflect 
the different association probabilities. We will 
now see how to define the costs so as to re
late the minimal cost flow to a best alignment. 
Let a be an alignment, under the above con
straints, between the English sentence e~, and 
the French sentence f~. Such an alignment a 
can be seen as a particular relation from the set 
of English words with their positions, including 
empty words, to the set of French words with 
their positions, including empty words (in our 
framework, it is formally equivalent to consider 
a single empty word with larger upper capac
ity bound or several ones with smaller upper 
capacity bounds; for the sake of simplicity in 
the formulas, we consider here that we add as 
many empty words as necessary in the sentences 
to end up with two sentences containing I~ + l/ 
words). An alignment thus connects each En
glish word, located in position i, ei, to a French 
word, in position j, fj. We consider that the 
probability of such a connection depends on two 
distinct and independent probabilities, the one 
of linking two positions, p(ap(i) = ai), and the 
one of linking two words, p(a~(ei) = f~). We 
can then write: 
le+l l 
P(a,e~,f~) : I-I p(ap(i): ail(a,e,f){-') 
i=1 
le+lI 
KI Zo, l( ,e,f)F 1) (4) 
i=1 
where P(a,e~,L) is the probability of ob
serving the alignment a together with 
the English and French sentences, e~ 
and f,, and (a,e,f)~ -1 is a shorthand for 
((tl, .., ai-1, el, .., el-l, f,*l, ", f~,-1 )" 
Since we simply rely in this model on asso
ciation probabilities, that we assume to be in
dependent, the only dependencies lying in the 
possibilities to associate words across languages, 
we can simplify the above formula and write: 
le+l/ 
i-1) P(a,e~,f~)= 1-I P(ei,f~,\[al (5) 
i=1 
where a~ -I is a shorthand for (al,..,ai-1). 
p(ei, f~,) is a shorthand for p(a~(ei) = f~,) that 
we will use throughout the articie. Due to the 
constraints defined, we have: p(ei, f~, \[a~) = 0 if 
ai E a\[ -1, and p(ei, f~i) otherwise. 
Equation (5) shows that if we define the cost 
associated to each edge from an English word ei 
(excluding the empty word) to a French word 
fj (excluding the empty word) to be 7,~ = 
-lnp(ei, fj), the cost of an edge involving an 
empty word to be e, an arbitrary small positive 
value, and the cost of a\]l the other edges (i.e. the 
edges fl'om SoP and SiP) to be 1 for example, 
then the minimal cost flow defines the alignment 
a for which P(a, e~, f~) is maximum, under the 
above constraints and approximations. 
We can use the following general algorithm 
based on maximum likelihood under the max
imum approximation, to estimate the parame
ters of our model: 
. 
. 
. 
set some initial value to the different pa
rameters of the model, 
for each sentence pair in the corpus, com
pute the best aligmnent (or an approxi
mation of this alignment) between words, 
with respect to the model, and update the 
counts of the different parameters with re
spect to this alignment (the maximum like
lihood estimators for model free distribu
tions are based on relative frequencies, con
ditioned by the set of best alignments in our 
case), 
go back to step 2 till an end condition is 
reached. 
446 
This algorithm converges after a few itera
tions. Here, we have to be carefull with step 1. 
In particular, if we consider at the beginning 
of the process all the possible alignments to be 
equiprobable, then all the feasible flows are min
imal cost flows. To avoid this situation, we have 
to start with initial probabilities which make 
use of the fact that some associations, occurring 
more often in the corpus, should have a larger 
probability. Probabilities based on relative fre
quencies, or derived from the measure defined 
in (Dunning, 1993), for example, allow to take 
this fact into account. 
We can envisage more complex models, in
cluding distortion parameters, multiword no
tions, or information on part-of-speech, infor
mation derived flom bilingual dictionaries or 
from thesauri. The integration of new param
eters is in general straigthforward. For multi
word notions, we have to replace the capacity 
values of edges connected to the source and the 
sink with capacity intervals, which raises several 
issues that we will not address in this paper. We 
rather want to present now e~n application of the 
flow network model to mnlti\]ingual terminology 
extraction. 
3 Multilingual
terminology 
extraction 
Several works describe methods to extract 
terms, or candidate terms, in English and/or 
French (Justeson and Katz, 1995; Daille, 1994; 
Nkwenti-Azeh, 1992). Some more specific works 
describe methods to align noun phrases within 
parallel corpora (Kupiec, 1993). The under
lying assumption beyond these works is that 
the monolingually extracted units correspond to 
each other cross-lingually. Unfortunately, this 
is not always the case, and the above method
ology suffers fl'om the weaknesses pointed out 
by (Wu, 1997) concerning parse-parse-match 
procedures. 
It is not however possible to fully reject 
the notion of grammar for term extraction, 
in so far as terms are highly characterized 
by their internal syntactic structure. We can 
also admit that lexical affinities between the 
diverse constituents of a unit can provide a 
good clue for termhood, but lexical affinities, 
or otherwise called collocations, affect differ
ent linguistic units that need anyway be distin
guished (Smadja, 1992). 
Moreover, a study presented in (Oaussier, 
199.5) shows that terminology extraction in t:;n
glish and in French is not symmetric. In many 
cases, it is possible to obtain a better approxi
mation for English terms than it is for French 
terms. This is partly due to the fact that 
English relies on a composition of Germanic 
type, as defined in (Chuquet and Paillard, 1989) 
for example, to produce compounds, and of 
Romance type to produce free NPs, whereas 
French relies on Romance type for both, with 
the classic PP attachment problems. 
These remarks lead us to advocate a mixed 
model, where candidate terms are identified in 
English and where their French correspondent 
is searched for. But since terms constitute rigid 
units, lying somewhere between single word no
tions and complete noun phrases, we should not 
consider all possible French units, but only the 
ones made of consecutive words. 
3.1 Model

It is possible to use flow network models to 
capture relations between English and French 
terms. But since we want to discover French 
units, we have to add extra vertices and nodes 
to our previous model, in order to account for 
all possible combinations of consecutive French 
words. We do that by adding several layers of 
vertices, the lowest layer being associated with 
the French words themselves, and each vertex 
in any upper layer being linked to two consec
utive vertices of the layer below. The uppest 
layer contains only one vertex and can be seen 
as representing the whole French sentence. We 
will call ~ fertility graph the graph thus ob
tained. Figure 1 gives an example of part of 
a fertility graph (we have shown the flow val
ues on each edge for clarity reasons; the brack
ets delimit a nultiword candidate term; we have 
not drawn the whole fertility graph encompass
ing the French sentence, but only part of it, 
the one encompassing the unit largeur de balzde 
utilisde, where the possible combinations of con
secutive words are represented by A, B, and C). 
Note that we restrict ourselves to lexical words 
(nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs), not try
ing to align grammatical words. Furthermore, 
we rely on lemmas rather than inflected h'oms, 
thus enabling us to conflate in one form all the 
variants of a verb for example (we have keeped 
447 
bandwidth used in \[ FSS telecommunications \] 
largeur ~ bande utilisde dans les t~16communications ....-. SFS 
Figure 1: Pseudo-alignment within a fertility graph 
inflected forms in our figures for readability rea
SOILS). 
The minimal cost flow in the graphs thus de
fined may not be directly usable. This is due to 
two problems: 
i. first, we can have ambiguous a.ssociations: 
in figure 1, for example, the association be
tween bandwidth and Iargeur de bande can 
be obtained through the edge linking these 
two units (type 1), or through two edges, 
one from bandwidth to largeur de bande, 
and one from bartdwidth to either Iargeur 
or &,~vde (type 2), or even through the two 
edges from bandwidth to largeur and bande 
(type .3), 
2. secondly, there may be conflicts between 
connections: in figure 1 both largeur de 
bande and tgl~communications are linked to 
bandwidth even though they are not con
tiguous. 
To solve ambiguous associations, we simply 
replace each association of type 2 or 3 by the 
equivalent type 1 association a. For conflicts, we 
use the following heuristics: first select the con
flicting edge with the lowest cost and assume 
3We can formally define an equivalence relation, in 
terms of the associations obtained, but this is beyond 
the scope of this paper. 
that the association thus defined actually oc
curred, then rerun the minimM cost flow algo
rithm with this selected edge fixed once and for 
all, and redo these two steps until there is no 
more conflicting edges, replacing type 2 or 3 as
sociations as above each time it is necessary. 
Finally, the alignment obtained in this way 
will be called a solved alignment 4. 
3.2 Experiment

In order to test the previous model, we se
lected a small bilinguM corpus consisting of 
1000 aligned sentences, from a corpus on satel
lite telecommunications. We then ran the fol
lowing algorithm, based on the previous modeh 
1. tag and lemmatise the English and French 
texts, mark all the English camdidate terms 
using morpho-syntactic rules encoded in 
regular expressions, 
2. build a first set of association probabili
ties, using the likelihood ratio test defined 
in (Gaussier, 1995), 
3. for each pair of Migned sentences, con
struct the fertility graph allowing a candi
date term of length n to be aligned with 
units of lenth (n-2) to (n+2), define the 
4Once the solved alignment is computed, it is possi
ble to determine the word associations between aligned 
units, through the application of the process described 
in the previous section with multiword notions. 
448 
costs of edges linking English vertices to 
French ones as the opposite of the loga
rithm of the normalised sum of probabili
ties of all possible word associations defined 
by the edge (for the edge between mtdtiple 
(el) access (e2) to the French unit acc~s 
(fl) mulitple (f2) it is ¼ (Eijp(ei, fj))), 
all the other edges receive an arbitrary cost 
value, compute the solved alignment, and 
increment the count of the associations ob
tained by overall value of the solved align
nlent, 
4. select the fisrt 100 unit associations accord
ing to their count, and consider them as 
valid. Go back to step 2, exclnding from 
the search space the associations selected, 
till all associations have been extracted. 
3.3 Results

To evaluate the results of the above procedure, 
we manually checked each set of associations ob
tained after each iteration of the process, going 
fl'om the first 100 to the first 500 associations. 
We considered an association as being correct 
if the French expression is a proper translation 
o\[ the English expression. The following ta.ble 
gives the precision of the associations obtained. 
N. Assoc. 
100 
200 
300 
400 
5OO 
Prec. 
98 
97 
96 
95 
90 
Table 1: General results 
The associations we are faced with represent 
different linguistic units. Some consist of single 
content words, whereas others represent multi
word expressions. One of the particularity of 
our process is precisely to automatically identify 
multiword expressions in one language, know
ing units in the other one. With respect to this 
task, we extracted the first two hundred mul
tiword expressions from the associations above, 
and then checked wether they were valid or not. 
We obtained the following results: 
N. Assoc. Prec. 
100 97 
200 94 
Table 2: Multiword notion results 
As a comparison, (Kupiec, 1993) obtained a 
precision of 90% for the first hundred associa
tions between English and French noun phrases, 
using the EM algorithm. Our experiments with 
a similar method showed a precision around 
92% for the first hundred associations on a set 
of aligned sentences comprising the one used for 
the above experiment. 
Art evaluation on single words, showed a pre
cision of 98% for the first hundred and 97% for 
the first two hundred. But these figures should 
be seen in fact as lower bounds of actual val
ues we can get, in so far as we have not tried 
to extract single word associations from multi
word ones. Here is an example of associations 
obtained. 
telecommunication satellite 
satelllite de tdIdcornrnunication 
communication satellite 
sateIllite de tdldcommunication 
new satellite system 
nouveau syst~rne de satellite 
syst~rne de satellite nouveau 
syst~me de satellite enti~rement nouvea~t 
operating fss telecommunication link 
exploiter la liason de tdldcommunication du @ 
implement rnise en oeuvre 
wavelength longueur d'onde 
offer offrir, proposer 
operation exploitation, opdration 
The empty words (prepositions, determiners) 
were extracted from the sentences. In all the 
cases above, the use of prepositions and deter
miners was consistent ali over the corpus. There 
are cases where two French units differ on a 
preposition. In such a case, we consider that 
we have two possible different translations for 
the English term. 
4 Conclusion

We presented a new model for word aligmnent 
based on flow networks. This model allows 
us to integrate different types of constraints in 
the search for the best word alignment within 
aligned sentences. We showed how this model 
can be applied to terminology extraction, where 
candidate terms are extracted in one language, 
449 
and discovered, through the alignment process, 
in the other one. Our procedure presents three 
main differences over other approaches: we do 
not force term translations to fit within specific 
patterns, we consider the whole sentences, thus 
enabling us to remove some ambiguities, and we 
rely on the association probabilities of the units 
as a whole, but also on the association proba
bilities of the elements within these units. 
The main application of the work we have 
described concerns the extraction of bilingual 
lexicons. Such extracted lexicons can be used 
in different contexts: as a source to help lexi
cographers build bilingual dictionaries in techni
cal domains, or as a resource for machine aided 
human translation systems. In this last case, 
we can envisage several ways to extend the no
tion of translation unit in translation memory 
systems, as the one proposed in (Langfi et al., 
1997). 
5 Acknowledgements

X,\[os~ of this work was done at the IBM-France 
Scientific Centre during my PhD research, un
der the direction of Jean-Marc Lang~, to whom 
I express my gratitude. Many thanks also to 
Jean-Pierre Chanod, Andeas Eisele, David Hull, 
and Christian Jacquemin for useful comments 
on earlier versions. 

References 

Peter F. Brown, Stephen A. Della Pietra, Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Robert L. Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of statistical machine translation: Parameter estimation. Computational Linguistics , 19(2). 

H. Chuquet and M. Paillard. 1989. Approche linguistique des probl~mes de traduction anglais-franqais. Ophrys. 

Ido Dagan, Kenneth W. Church, and William A. Gale. 1993. Robust bilingual word alignment for machine aided translation. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora. 

Bfiatrice Daille. 1994. Approche mixte pour l'eztraction de terminologie : statistique lexicale et filtres Iinguistiques. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Paris 7. 

T. Dunning. 1993. Accurate methods for the statistics of surprise and coincidence. Computational Linguistics, 19(1). 

L.R. Ford and D.R. Fulkerson. 1962. Flows in networks. Princeton University Press. 

William Gale and Kenneth Church. 1993. A program for aligning sentences in bilingual corpora. Computational Linguistics, 19(1). 

I~ric Gaussier. 1995. ModUles statistiques et patrons morphosyntaziques pour l'extraction de Iexiques bilingues de termes. Ph.D. thesis, Univ. Paris 7. 

John S. Jnsteson and Slava M. Katz. 1995. Technical terminology: some linguistic properties and an algorithm for identification in text. Natural Language Engineering, 1(1). 

Martin Kay and M. RSscheisen. 1993. Text-translation alignment. Computational Linguistics, 19(1). 

M. Klein. 1967. A primal method for minimal cost flows, with applications to the assignment and transportation problems. Management Science. 

Julian Kupiec. 1993. An algorithm for finding noun phrase correspondences in bilingual corpora. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 

Jean-Marc Lang,, l~ric Gaussier, and B~atrice Daill. 1997. Bricks and skeletons: some ideas for the near future of maht. Machine Translation, 12(1). 

Dan I. Melamed. 1996. Automatic construction of clean broad-coverage translation le~cons. In Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas (AMTA). 

Basile Nkwenti-Azeh. 1992. Positional and combinational characteristics of satellite comnmnications terms. Technical report, CC1-UMIST, Manchester. 

Frank Smadja. 1992. How to compile a bilingual collocational ie.,dcon automatically. In Proceedings of AAAI-92 Workshop on Statistically-Based NLP techniques. 

Stephan Vogel, Hermann Ney, and Christoph Tillmann. 1996. Hmm-based word alignment in statistical translation. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics. 

Dekai Wu. 1997. Stochastic inversion transduction grammars and bilingual parsing of parallel corpora. Computational Linguistics, 23(3).  

