Diagram Understanding Using Integration of 
Layout Information and Textual Information 
Yasuhiko Watanabe 
Ryukoku University 
Seta, Otsu 
Shiga, Japan 
watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp 
Makoto Nagao 
Kyoto University 
Yoshida, Sakyo-ku 
Kyoto, Japan 
nagao@kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp 
1 Introduction

Pattern information and natural language informa
tion used together can complement and reinforce 
each other to enable more effective communication 
than can either medium alone (Feiner 91) (Naka
mura 93). One of the good examples is a pictorial 
book of flora (PBF). In the PBF, readable explana
tions which combine texts, pictures, and diagrams 
are achieved, as shown in Figure 1 and 2. Taking 
advantage of this, we propose here a new method 
for analyzing the PBF diagrams by using natural 
language information. 
In the PBF, many kinds of information about 
plants are generally stored in the following media: 
• picture, 
• explanation text, and 
• diagram. 
Pictures and explanation texts describe the shape, 
botany, and environment of each plant, as shown in 
Figure 1. On the contrary, as shown in Figure 2, 
diagrams describe very clearly the following kinds 
of information: 
• correspondence between each part of the plant 
and its name 
• part-whole relationship and synonymous words 
As a result, diagrams are quite important in or
der to understand the explanation of each plant. 
For example, pictures and explanation texts cannot 
convey the information which is necessary to answer 
the following questions: 
• which part of plant is "~akuyou (stipules)"? 
• what shape is "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)"? 
Consequently, we have to investigate the method 
for understanding diagrams. 
It is certain that diagrams are effective means 
of communication. However, it is also true that 
we feel difficulties when we try to understand dia
grams without the explanation by natural language. 
From this, we conclude that natural language infor
mation is important to understand diagrams. Con
sequently, we propose a new framework for the in
spiraea cantoniensis 
Figure 1: An example of a PBF article (in Japanese) 
f ~ sokumyaku (lateral vein) chumyaku (midrib) youeki (axil) mitsusen--~ youhei (petiole) 
{nectary) takuyou (stipules) 
~. ha (leaf) 
Figure 2: An examples of PBF diagrams (leaf) 
tegration of pattern (layout) information and natu
ral language information for semantic understand
ing the PBF diagrams. In this study, for the obser
vation and experiments, we use a PBF (in Japanese) 
the subject of which are wild flowers of Japan. 
1374 
daenkei hishinkei shinkei 
(ellipsoida,) (,anceolate) (cordate '~ \ shape / \ shape \ shape 
ha no katachi (leaf shape) 
Figure 3: The shape of leaf 
2 Diagram
Understanding 
2.1 PBF
Diagram Understanding 
A diagram in the PBF consists of its title and ele
ments. A title shows the subject of the diagram and 
it is generally located under the diagram. Elements 
may be classified into three types: 
• symbol, 
• sketch, 
• word. 
Symbols (arrow, line, parenthesis, etc.) connect di
agram elements. Sketches represent the features of 
a plant readably and accurately. The features rep
resented by sketches are explained by words in the 
diagram. Observing the PBF diagrams, the infor
mation explained by words is classified into five cat
egories, such as: 
1. names of plant parts. 
(example) "takuyou (stipules)" in Figure 2 
2. types of plant parts. 
(example) "laika (follicle)" and "mikanjyoka 
(hespidium)" in Figure 4 
3. properties of plant parts. 
(example) "daenkei (ellipsoidal shape)" in Fig
ure 3 
4. names of plant species. 
(example) "katsura" and "natsumikan" in Fig
ure 4 
5. additional explanation. 
(example) "shinpi no chuou ga sakeru (carpel 
splits open in its center)" in Figure 5 
Diagram understanding is the semantic interpreta
tion of the elements in the diagram. As mentioned, 
in the PBF diagrams, the information represented 
by sketches is explained by words. From this, we 
  
'katsura' 
taika (follicle) mikanjyoka (hespidium) 
kajitsu" (fruit) 
kan' 
Figure 4: The variety of fruits 
houhairekkai 
(Ioculicidal dehiscence) 
shinpi no chuou ga sakeru 
(carpel splits open in its center) 
rekkai (dehiscence) 
Figure 5: The process of dehiscence 
conclude that the semantic interpretation of the 
PBF diagrams is the classification of words in a di
agram into these five categories. 
For this purpose, we propose a new framework for 
the semantic interpretation of words in the PBF di
agrams by using not only the pattern (layout) infor
mation but also the natural language information. 
The reason is as follows: there is no composing rule 
that strongly restricts the positions of elements and 
the semantic relations between elements. In other 
words, there are many ways of composing diagrams 
to explain an idea. For this reason, it is difficult to 
interpret the PBF diagrams only by using the pat
tern (layout) information. For example, "daenkei 
(ellipsoidal shape)", "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)", 
and "shinkei (cordate shape)" in Figure 3 represent 
the properties of the plant part, on the contrary, 
"taika (follicle)" and "mikanjyoka (hespidium)" in 
Figure 4 represent the types of the plant part. In 
spite of the semantic difference, all these words are 
located under the corresponding sketches, respec
tively. 
2.2 Related
Work 
There are a few research topics related to diagram 
understanding. (Plant 89) (Futrelle 90) recognized 
the semantic structure of diagrams as the extension 
of diagram analysis. But they analyzed diagrams 
1375 
by using knowledge about diagrams which is quite 
separate from natural language information. On 
the contrary, (Nakamura 93) analyzed diagrams in 
the encyclopedia dictionary by using its explanation 
texts and the thesaurus information. But it is diffi
cult to analyze the PBF diagrams in the same way 
as (Nakamura 93) did. The reasons are as follows: 
• It is certain that the explanation texts in the 
PBF are closely related to the PBF diagrams. 
However, these texts do not describe the con
tents of diagrams but the features of plants. 
That is, there is no explanation text for the 
PBF diagrams. 
• Words in the PBF diagrams are generally tech
nical terms which are not registered in the 
common thesaurus. 
To solve these problems, we propose a new frame
work to analyze the PBF diagrams by using many 
kinds of clue expressions in the PBF explanation 
texts. 
3 Information
for PBF Diagram 
Understanding 
3.1 Layout
Information 
For analyzing the PBF diagrams, we utilize two 
kinds of layout information. These are: 
• type of relationships between diagram elements 
• similarity of spatial relationships between di
agram elements 
Every word in the PBF diagrams is related to the 
other elements (sketches or other words). The re
lationships between words and the corresponding 
elements are classified into 2 types: 
connection is the relationship between the word 
and its corresponding element. These are con
nected together by a symbol. For example, the 
relationship between "tatcuyou (stipules)" and 
the "leaf" sketch in Figure 2 is connection. 
adjacency is the relationship between the word 
and its corresponding element. These are ad
jacent to each other and not connected by 
a symbol. For example, the relationship be
tween "natsumikan" and the right sketch in 
the Figure 4 is adjacency. 
A word connected by a symbol represents a name 
of the plant part. Consequently, in this case, the 
spatial relationship between the word and the corre
sponding element is not important for the semantic 
interpretation. For example, the semantic interpre
tation of "mitsusen (nectary)" in Figure 2 would 
remain unchanged even if "rnitsusen" was located 
on the right of the "leaP' sketch. 
On the contrary, a word which is not connected 
by a symbol may represent any type of informa
tion. Consequently, in this case, the spatial rela
tionship between the word and the corresponding 
element is important for the semantic interpreta
tion. For example, it is inadequate to replace the 
position between "mikanjyoka" and "natsumikan" 
in Figure 4. It is because the replacement breaks the 
similarity of the spatial relationship which "mikan
jyoka (hespidium)" and "taika (follicle)" have. In 
this way, words ill the PBF diagrams which repre
sent the same kind of information, ohen have the 
same spatial relationship. From this, we utilize the 
similarity of the spatial relationships for the prop
agation of the semantic interpretation in this way: 
suppose that words A and B have the same spatial 
relationship. If A is given the semantic interpreta
tion but B is not, the semantic interpretation of A 
is given to B. 
3.2 Natural
Language Information 
As mentioned previously, the PBF texts do not ex
plain the PBF diagrams but describe many kinds 
of plants. The explanation texts, however, include 
many clues which are useful to classify the words in 
the PBF diagrams into the five semantic categories. 
In order to realize the semantic analysis, we uti
lize two kinds of natural language information for 
diagram understanding. These are: 
• titles of the PBF articles. 
• typical expressions which show implicitly the 
semantic interpretation of words in the PBF 
diagram. 
Titles of the PBF articles represent names of the 
species. Typical expressions which we utilize for 
analyzing the diagrams are such as: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
where A is a word in the diagram, "ha" and "ga" are 
Japanese postpositions, and "suru" accompanies a 
noun and verbalizes it. These five expression pat
terns are useful to interpret the words in the PBF 
diagrams. For example, words which represent the 
names of plant parts are found in expressions (a), 
(b), and (c), as shown in text (S 1) --, (S-3), but 
not in expressions (d) and (e). 
(S-I) ha (leaf) ha daenkei (ellipsoidal shape) 
(S-2) kibu ni (at the base) ha mitsusen (nectary) 
ga aru (exist) 
(S-3) rimen ni (in the back) ha myaku (vein) ni 
sotte (along) ke (hair) ga missei (glow tightly) 
SU~'U 
On the contrary, words which represent the prop
erties are found in the expressions (d) and (e), as 
shown in texts (S-4) and (S-5), but not in expres
sions (a), (b), and (c). 
1376 
~eshibe {pistil) /\] oshibe 
oshibe \[~-meshibe~ 
ryoseibana mebana obana ( 
hermaphrodite'~ ('female"~ ( male "~ flower / \flower 
\] k, flower\] 
hana (flower) 
Figure 6: A diagram of flower 
\[I ~ibe \]~ibe~ ? 
( hermaphrodlt.~ (famale'~ ( male h flower / \flower) ~flowerJ 
hana (flower) 
Figure 7: ID number of each word and sketch 
in Figure 6 
ID Number 
Word01 
Word02 
Word03 
Word04 
Word05 ,. Writing 
meshibe 
oshibe ,rYoseibana 
meshibe 
mebana 
Corresponding 
element 
Sketch01 
Sketch01 
Sketch01 
Sketch02 
Sketch02 
type of 
correspondence 
connection 
connection 
adjacency 
connection 
adjacency. 
position 
bottom 
bottom 
Word06 oshibe Sketch03 adjacency _ above right 
Word07 obana Sketch03 adjacency bottom 
Writing 
meshibe 
oshibe 
ryos'eibana 
mebana 
obana 
(a) layout information of Figure 6 
expression pattern 
Title (~) I (b) I (c) I (d) I (e) 
0 46 23 0 0 0 
0 194 37 5 0 6 
'0 4 0 0 1 0 
' 0 26 2 O' 1 0 
0 41 1 0 3 0 
(Note) expression pattern 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A+ ga + aru 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (a is a verbalized noun) + suru 
(b) natural language information of Figure 6 
Figure 8: An example of the layout and natural language information 
(S-4) kajitsu (fruit) ha kyukei (spherical shape) 
(S-5) kajyo (inflorescence) ha tyousei (terminal) SUFU 
4 Process
of PBF Diagram 
Understanding 
4.1 Representation
of Layout Information 
Layout information is represented by hand in the 
following way. 
Step 1. give ID nmnber to all words and sketches 
in the diagram. 
Step 2. describe the following kinds of information 
for each word in the diagram. 
1. ID number 
2. writing 
3. ID number of the corresponding element 
4. type of correspondence (connection or ad
jacency) 
5. relative position from the center of the 
corresponding element when the type of 
correspondence is adjacency (we use 8 di
rections for the description: top, above 
right, right, below right, bottom, below 
left, left, above left) 
Figure 7 shows the given ID number of each word 
and sketch in Figure 6. Figure 8 (a) represents the 
layout information of Figure 6. For example, Fig
ure 8 (a) shows that "ryoseibana (hermaphrodite 
flower)" in Figure 6 has Word03 as the ID number, 
corresponds with Sketch01 (a sketch in the left of 
Figure 6), and is located under Sketch01. More
over, by checking the information on the position, 
words which have the same spatial relationship can 
be detected. For example, Figure 8 (a) shows that 
there are words under the left sketch, under the 
central sketch, and in the above right and under 
the right sketch. Using this information, Word03 
("ryoseibana"), Word05 ("mebana"), and Word07 
1377 
WordO1 
Word02 
Word03 
Word04 
Word05 
Word06 
Word07 
Writing 
meshibe name of plant parts 
oshibe name of plant parts 
ryoseibana type of plant parts 
meshibe name of plant parts 
mebana type of plant parts 
oshibe name of plant parts 
obana type of plant part s 
Res~ 
Rule 1 
Rule 1 
Rule 5 
Rule 1 
Rule 5 
Rule 4 
Rule 5 
Figure 9: Results of the semantic analysis for Figure 
6 
("obana") are detected as the words which have 
the same spatial relationship with the correspond
ing sketch. 
4.2 Extraction
and Representation of 
Natural Language Information 
Natural language information, which is useful to in
terpret the words in the PBF diagrams, such as, 
titles and expression patterns, is extracted and rep
resented in the following way: 
Step 1. Extract titles from the explanation texts. 
Step 2. Japanese morphological analysis. We used 
JUMAN(Kurohashi 97) as a Japanese mor
phological analyzer. 
Step 3. Extract the following expression patterns 
by pattern matching from the results of the 
Japanese morphological analysis. 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
(d) ha + A (A is a predicative noun) 
(e) A (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
where A is a word in a diagram. 
Step 4. Describe the results of Step 1 and 3 as the 
natural language information. 
Figure 8 (b) shows the natural language information 
of Figure 6. The number of each expression pattern 
in Figure 8 (b) shows the frequency of it in the PBF 
explanation texts. 
4.3 Semantic
Analysis by Integration of 
Layout Information and Natural 
Language Information 
In this section, we describe the process of seman
tic analysis for the PBF diagrams by using the inte
gration of layout and natural language information. 
The semantic analysis is realized by applying the 
following rules in order: (Figure 9 shows the results 
of the semantic analysis for Figure 6) 
Rule 1. \[Rule for names of plant parts by using 
symbols\] 
A word which is connected to the other ele
ment by a symbol is interpreted as a name of 
the plant part. For example, "meshibe" (Word01 
and Word04) and "oshibe" (Word02) in Figure 
6, each of which is connected with its corre
sponding sketch by an arrow, are interpreted 
as the name of the plant part by this rule. 
Rule 2. \[Rule for names of plant species\] 
A word is interpreted as a name of the plant 
species, when it is: 
(a) a title of the PBF articles, or 
(b) written in Katakana letters 1 
For example, "katsura" and "natsumikan" in 
Figure 4 are interpreted as the name of the 
species by this rule. It should be noted that 
"katsura", that is a wild kind, is one in the 
titles of the PBF articles. On the contrary, 
"natsumikan", that is a cultivated kind, is not 
a title in the PBF. It is because the subject 
of the PBF which we used is wild flowers in 
Japan. As a result of this, "katsura" and "nat
sumikan" are interpreted by the condition above 
(a) and (b) in this rule, respectively. 
Rule 3. \[Rule for properties of plant parts\] 
A word in a diagram is interpreted as a prop
erty of the plant part when it is found in the 
expression pattern (d) and (e) described in 
Section 3.2, such as: 
(d) ha + A (a is a predicative noun) 
(e) a (A is a verbalized noun) + suru 
and never found in the rest of the expression 
patterns in Section 3.2. For example, "daenkei 
(ellipsoidal shape)", "hishinkei (lanceolate shape)", 
and "shinkei (cordate shape)" in Figure 3 are 
interpreted as the properties of the plant part 
by this rule. 
Rule 4. \[Rule for names of plant parts by using the 
expression patterns\] 
A word in a diagram is interpreted as a name 
of the plant part when it is found in the ex
pression patterns (a), (b), and (c) described in 
Section 3.2, such as: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
and never found in the rest of expression pat
terns in Section 3.2. For example, "oshibe" 
(Word06) in Figure 6 is interpreted as the name 
of the plant part by this rule. 
1In Japanese PBF, names of species are generally 
written in Katakana letters. For example, "katsura" 
and "natsumikan" in Figure 4 are written in Katakana 
letters. 
1378 
Relation 
connectio'n 
adjacency 
name of 
a plant part 
success failure 
74 0 
1 7 
Table 1: Results of the semantic analysis 
property of type of 
a plant part a plant part 
success failure success failure 
112 0 33 5 
name of 
species 
success failure 
23 1 
additional 
explanation 
success failure 
3 0 
Rule 5. \[Rule for types of plant parts\] 
Words in a diagram are interpreted as the types 
of the plant part when the following conditions 
are satisfied. 
1. Each sketch is related to one of these 
words. 
2. These words have the same spatial rela
tionship with the corresponding sketch. 
3. These words have the same Kanji char
acter at the end of the writing. 
4. Some of these words are found in the 
expression pattern (a), (b), and (c) de
scribed in Section 3.2: 
(a) A + ha + predicative noun 
(b) A + ga + aru (exist) 
(c) A + ga + verbalized noun + suru 
For example, "ryoseibana (hermaphrodite flower)", 
"mebana (female flower)", and "obana (male 
flower)" in Figure 6 are interpreted as the types 
of the plant part by this rule. 
Rule 6. \[Propagation of semantic interpretation\] 
A word which cannot be interpreted by the 
rules 1-5 is given the same semantic informa
tion as the word which has the same spatial 
relationship. The way of detecting the words 
which have the same spatial relationship is de
scribed in Section 4.1. 
Rule 7. \[Rule for additional explanation\] 
An additional explanation generally includes 
• postposition 
• adjective 
• verb 
• adverb 
Taking advantage of this, words are interpreted 
as an additional explanation when the result of 
their Japanese morphological analysis includes 
the above types of a part-of-speec h. For ex
ample, "shinpi no chuou ga sakeru (carpel splits 
open in its center)" in Figure 5 is interpreted 
as an additional explanation by this rule. 
5 Experimental
Results 
To evaluate our approach, we used 31 PBF dia
grams in an experiment. These 31 diagrams in
cluded 175 sketches and 259 words. Table 1 shows 
tantaioshibe nitaioshibe 
monadelphous ~ (dladelphous 
stamens / \ stamens / 
nikyooshibe tataioshibe ( 
didynamous'~ (polyadelphous x I 
stamens / \ stamens / 
oshibe (stamen) 
(a) A diagram of stamen 
syuyakuoshibe ( 
syngeneslous~ 
stamens / 
mebana ~n~ 
ryoseibana 
obana 
shiyuzakkyosei {polygamous} 
ryoseibana 
mebana 
(b) A diagram of polygamous 
Figure 10: Examples of incorrect analysis 
the results of the semantic analysis of these dia
grams. 
Figure 10 gives two examples of the failures in 
this experiment. The words in Figure 10 (a) repre
sent the types of "oshibe (stamen)", and could not 
be interpreted by our approach. This is because 
these words, such as "niiaioshibe (diadelphous sta
mens)", are rarely used in the PBF texts, and could 
not be found in five kinds of expression patterns 
in Section 3.2. The words in Figure 10 (b), "ryo
seibana (hermaphrodite flower)", "mebana (female 
flower)", and "obana (male flower)" represent the 
names of the plant part. But these words could 
1379 
not be interpreted by the rule 4 in our method be
cause these words are found in the expressions, such 
as: 
($-6) daibubun (most oftheflower) ha ryoseibana 
(hermaphrodite flower) 
(S-7) chuou no lkko (a flower in the center) ha 
mebana (female flower) 
(8-8) sokuhou no 2ko (two flowers in the corner) 
ha obana (male flower) 
6 Conclusion

At the moment, the pattern (layout) information 
is extracted and represented by hand. To realize 
an automatic extraction and representation of the 
pattern (layout) information, we have to investigate 
the following methods: 
• a method for extracting the diagram elements 
• a method for detecting the corresponding re
lations between the diagram elements 
Fortunately, a large amount of diagrams is created 
and stored on computers. Taking advantage of this, 
we may avoid the difficulties in extracting the dia
gram elements by image processing. For this rea
son, we would like to investigate the method for 
detecting the spatial relationship between the dia
gram elements. 

References 

Feiner, McKeown: Automating the Generation of Coor
dinated Multimedia Explanations, IEEE Computer, 
Vol.24 No.10, (1991). 

Futrelle: Strategies for diagram understanding: Gener
alized equivalence, spatial/object pyramids and ani
mate vision, Proc. 10th ICPR, (1990) 

Kurohashi, Nagao: JUMAN Man,lal version 3.4 (in Japanese), 
Nagao Lab., Kyoto University, (1997) 2 
Nagao: Methods of Image Pattern Recognition (in Japanese), 
CORONA, (1983). 

Nakamura, Furukawa, Nagao: Diagram Understanding 
Utilizing Natural Language Text, 2nd International 
Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, 
(1993). 

Plant, Scrievner, Schappo, Woodcock: Usage and gen
erality of knowledge in the interpretation of diagrams, 
Knowledge-Based Systems, Vol.2 No.2, (1989). 

