Evaluating a Focus-Based Approach to Anaphora Resolution* 
Saliha Azzam, Kevin Humphreys and Robert Gaizauskas 
{ s. azzam, k. humphreys, r. gaizauskas }Odes. shef. ac. uk 
Department of Computer Science, University of Sheffield 
Regent Court, Portobello Road 
Sheffield SI 4DP UK 
Abstract 
We present an approach to anaphora resolution 
based on a focusing algorithm, and implemented 
within an existing MUC (Message Understand
ing Conference) Information Extraction system, 
allowing quantitative evaluation against a sub
stantial corpus of annotated real-world texts. 
Extensions to the basic focusing mechanism can 
be easily tested, resulting in refinements to the 
mechanism and resolution rules. Results show 
that the focusing algorithm is highly sensitive 
to the quality of syntactic-semantic analyses, 
when compared to a simpler heuristic-based ap
proach. 
1 Introduction

Anaphora resolution is still present as a signi
ficant linguistic problem, both theoretically and 
practically, and interest has recently been re
newed with the introduction of a quantitative 
evaluation regime as part of the Message Under
standing Conference MUC) evaluations of In
formation Extraction (IE) systelns (Grishman 
and Sundheim, 1996) This has made it pos
sible to evaluate different (implementable) the
oretical approaches against sizable corpora of 
real-world texts, rather than the small collec
tions of artificial examples typically discussed 
in the literature. 
This paper describes an evaluation of a focus
based approach to pronoun resolution (not ana
phora in general), based on aI1 extension of 
Sidner's algorithm (Sidner, 1981) proposed in 
(Azzam, 1996), with further refinements from 
development on real-world texts. The approach 
* This work was carried out in the context of the EU 
AVENTINUS project (Thumair, 1996), which aims to 
develop a multilingual IE system for drug enforcement, 
and including a language-independent coreference mech
anism (Azzam et al., 1998). 
is implemented within the general coreference 
mechanism provided by the LaSIE (Large Scale 
Information Extraction) system (Gaizauskas et 
al., 1995) and (Humphreys et al., 1998), Shef
field University's entry in the MUC-6 and 7 
evaluations. 
2 Focus
in Anaphora Resolution 
The term focus, along with its many relations 
such as theme, topic, center, etc., reflects an in
tuitive notion that utterances in discourse are 
usually 'about' something. This notion has been 
put to use in accounts of numerous linguistic 
phenomena, but it has rarely been given a firm 
enough definition to allow its use to be evalu
ate& For anaphora resolution, however, stem
ruing from Sidner's work, focus has been given 
an algorithmic definition and a set of rules for its 
application. Sidner's approach is based on the 
claim that anaphora generally refer to the cur
rent discourse focus, and so modelling changes 
in focus through a discourse will allow the iden
tification of antecedents. 
The algorithm makes use of several focus re
gisters to represent the current state of a dis
course: CF, the current focus; AFL, the altern
ate focus list, containing other candidate feel; 
and FS, the focus stack. A parallel structure to 
the CF, AF the actor focus, is also set to deal 
with agentive pronouns. The algorithm updates 
these registers after each sentence, confirming or 
rejecting the current focus. A set of Interpret
ation Rules (IRs) applies whenever an anaphor 
is encountered, proposing potential antecedents 
from the registers, from which one is chosen us
ing other criteria: syntactic, semantic, inferen
tiM, etc. 
74 
2.1 Evaluating
Focus-Based Approaches 
Sidner's algorithmic account, although not ex
haustively specified, has lead to the implement
ation of fbcus-based approaches to anaphora 
resolution in several systems, e.g. PIE (Lin, 
1995). However, evaluation of the approach has 
mainly consisted of manual analyses of small 
sets of t)roblematic cases mentioned in the liter
ature. Precise evaluation over sizable corpora of 
real-world texts has only recently become pos
sible, through the resources provided as part of 
the MUC evaluations. 
3 Coreference
in LaSIE 
The LaSIE system (Gaizauskas et al., 1995) 
and (Humphreys et al., 1998), has been de
signed as a general purpose IE system which 
can conform to the MUC task specifications for 
named entity identification, coreference resolu
tion, IE template clement and relation identific
ation, and the construction of scenario-specific 
IE templates. The system is basically a pipeline 
architecture consisting of tokenisation, sentence 
splitting, part-of-speech tagging, morphological 
stemming, list lookup, parsing with semantic in
terpretation, proper name matching, and dis
course interpretation. The latter stage con
structs a discourse model, based on a predefined 
domain model, using the, often partial, se
mantic analyses supplied by the parser. 
The domain model represents a hierarchy of 
domain-relevant concept nodes, together with 
associated properties. It is expressed in the XI 
formalism (Gaizauskas, 1995) which provides a 
basic inheritance mechanism for property values 
and the ability to represent multiple classificat
ory dimensions in the hierarchy. Instances of 
concepts inentioned in a text are added to the 
domain model, populating it to become a text-, 
or discourse-, specific model. 
Coreference resolution is carried out by at
tempting to merge each newly added instance, 
including pronouns, with instances already 
present in the model. The basic mechanism 
is to examinc, for each new-old pair of in
stances: semantic type consistency/similarity 
in the concept hierarchy; attribute value con
sistency/similarity, and a set of heuristic rules, 
some specific to pronouns, which can act to rule 
out a proposed merge. These rules can refer 
to various lexical, syntactic, semantic, and po
sitional information about instances. The in
tegration of the focus-based approach replaces 
the heuristic rules for pronouns, and represents 
the use of LaSIE as an evaluation platform for 
more theoretically motivated algorithms. It is 
possible to extend the approach to include def
inite NPs but, at present, the existing rules are 
retained for non-pronominal anaphora in the 
MUC coreference task: proper names, definite 
noun phrases and bare nouns. 
4 Implementing
Focus-Based 
Pronoun Resolution in LaSIE 
Our implementation makes use of the algorithm 
proposed in (Azzam, 1996), where elementary 
events (EEs, effectively simple clauses) are used 
as basic processing units, rather than sentences. 
Updating the focus registers and the application 
of interpretation rules (IRs) for pronoun resolu
tion then takes place after each EE, permitting 
intrasentential references. 1 In addition, an ini
tim 'expected focus' is determined based on the 
first EE in a text, providing a potential ante
cedent for any pronoun within the first EE. 
Development of the algorithm using real
world texts resulted in various further refine
ments to the algorithm, in both the IRs and the 
rules for updating the focus registers. The fol
lowing sections describe the two rules sets sep
arately, though they are highly interrelated in 
both development and processing. 
4.1 Updating
the Focus 
The algorithm includes two new focus registers, 
in addition to those mentioned in section 2: 
AFS, tile actor focus stack, used to record pre
vious AF (actor focus) values and so allow a 
separate set of IRs for agent pronouns (animate 
verb subjects); and Intra-AFL, the intrasenten
tial alternate focus list, used to record candidate 
foci from the current EE only. 
In the space available here, the algorithm 
is best described through an example showing 
the use of the registers. This example is taken 
from a New York Times article in the MUC-7 
training corpus on aircraft crashes: 
1 An
important limitation of Sidner's algorithm, noted 
in (Azzam, 1996), is that the focus registers are only 
updated after each sentence. Thus antecedents proposed 
for an anaphor in the current sentence will always be 
from the previous sentence or before and intrasentential 
references are impossible. 
75 
State Police said witnesses told them the pro
peller was not turning as the plane descended 
quickly toward the highway in Wareham near 
Exit 2. It hit a tree. 
EE-I: State Police said tell_event 
An 'expected focus' algorithm applies to 
initialise the registers as follows: 
CF (current focus) = tell_event 
AF (actor focus) = State Police 
Intra-AFL remains empty because EE-1 
contains no other candidate foci. No other 
registers are affected by the expected focus. 
No pronouns occur in EE~I and so no IRs apply. 
EE-2: witnesses told them 
The Intra-AFL is first initialised with all 
(non-pronominal) candidate tbci in the EE: 
Intra-AFL = witnesses 
The IRs are then applied to the first pronoun, 
them, and, in this case, propose the current AF, 
State Police, as the antecedent. The Intra-AFL 
is immediately updated to add the antecedent: 
Intra-AFL = State Police, witnesses 
EE-2 has a pronoun in 'thematic' position, 
'theme' being either the object of a transitive 
verb, or the subject of an intransitive or the 
copula (following (Gruber, 1976)). Its ante
cedent therefore becomes the new CF, with the 
previous value moving to the FS. EE-2 has an 
'agent', where this is an animate verb subject 
(again as in (Gruber, 1976)), and this becomes 
the new AF. Because the old AF is now the 
CF, it is not added to the AFS as it would 
be otherwise. After each EE the Intra-AFL is 
added to the current AFL, excluding the CF. 
The state after EE-2 is then: 
CF = State Police AI,' = witnesses 
FS = tell_event AFL -witnesses 
EE-3: the propeller was not turning 
The Intra-AFL is reinitialised with candidate 
loci from this EE: 
Intra-AFL = propeller 
No pronouns occur in EE-3 and so no IRs 
apply. The 'theme', propeller here because 
of the copula, becomes the new CF and the 
old one is added to the FS. The AF remains 
unchanged as tile current EE lacks an agent: 
CF = propeller 
AF = witnesses 
FS = State Police, tell_event 
AFL = propeller, witnesses 
EE-4: the plane descended 
lntra-AFL = the plane 
CF = the plane (theme) 
AF = witnesses (unchanged) 
FS = propeller, State Police, tell_event 
AFL = the plane, propeller, witnesses 
In the current algorithm the AFL is reset at 
this point, because EE-4 ends the sentence. 
EE-5: it hit a tT~e 
Intra-AFL = a tree 
The IRs resolve the pronoun it with the CF: 
CF = the plane (unchanged) 
AF = witnesses (unchanged) 
FS = propeller, State Police, tell_event 
AFL = a tree 
4.2 Interpretation
Rules 
Pronouns are divided into three classes, each 
with a distinct set of IRs proposing antecedents: 
Personal pronouns acting as agents (an
imate subjects): (e.g. he in Shotz said he 
knew the pilots) AF proposed initially, then an
imate members of AFL. 
Non-agent pronouns: (e.g. them in EE-2 
above and it in EE-5) CF proposed initially, 
then members of tile AFL and FS. 
Possessive~ reciprocal and reflexive pro
nouns (PRRs): (e.g. their in the brothers 
had left and were on their way home) Ante
cedents proposed from tile Intra-AFL, allowing 
intra-EE references. 
Antecedents proposed by the IRs are accep
ted or rejected based on their semantic type and 
feature compatibility, using the semantic and 
attribute value similarity scores of LaSIE's ex
isting coreference mechanism. 
5 Evaluation
with the MUC Corpora 
As part of MUC (Grishman and Sundheim, 
1996), coreferencc resolution was evaluated as 
a sub-task of information extraction, which in
volved negotiating a definition of coreference re
lations that could be reliably evaluated. The fi
nal definition included only 'identity' relations 
between text strings: proper nouns, common 
nouns and pronouns. Other possible corefer
ence relations, such as 'part-whole', and non
text strings (zero anaphora) were excluded. 
76 
The definition was used to manually annot
ate several corpora of newswire texts, using 
SGML markup to indicate relations between 
text strings. Automatically annotated texts, 
produced by systems using the same markup 
scheme, wcrc then compared with the manually 
annotated versions, using scoring software made 
available to MUC participants, based on (Vilain 
et al., 1995). 
The scoring software calculates the stand
ard Information Retrieval metrics of 'recall' and 
'precision', ~ together with an overall f-measure. 
The following section presents the results ob
tained using the corpora and scorer provided 
for MUC-7 training (60 texts, average 581 words 
per text, 19 words per sentence) and evaluation 
(20 texts, average 605 words per text, 20 words 
per sentence), the latter provided for the formal 
MUC-7 run and kept blind during development. 
6 Results

The MUC scorer does not distinguish between 
different classes of anaphora (pronouns, definite 
noun phrases, bare nouns, and proper nouns), 
but baseline figures can be established by run
ning the LaSIE system with no attempt made 
to resolve any pronouns: 
Corpus Recall Precision f 
Training: 42.4% 73.6% 52.6% 
Evaluation: 44.7% 73.9% 55.7% 
LaSIE with the simple pronoun resolution 
heuristics of the non-focus-based mechanism 
achieves the following: 
Corpus Recall Precision f 
Training: 58.2% 71.3% 64.1% 
Evaluat ion : 56.0% 70.2% 62.3% 
showing that more than three quarters of the 
estimated 20% of pronoun coreferences in the 
corpora are correctly resolved with only a minor 
loss of precision. 
LaSIE with the focus-based algorithm 
achieves the following: 
2Recall is a measure of how many correct (i.e. manu
ally annotated) coreferences a system found, and preci
sion is a measure of how many coreferenccs that the sys
tem proposed were actually correct. For example, with 
100 manually annotated coreference relations in a corpus 
and a system that proposes 75, of which 50 are correct, 
recall is then 50/100 or 50% and precision is 50/75 or 
66.7%. 
Corpus Recall Precision f 
Training : 55.4% 70.3% 61.9% 
Evaluation: 53.3% 69.7% 60.4% 
which, while demonstrating that the focus
based algorithm is applicable to real-world text, 
does question whether the more complex al
gorithm has any real advantage over LaSIE's 
original simple approach. 
The lower performance of the focus-based al
gorithm is mainly due to an increased reliance 
on the accuracy and completeness of the gram
matical structure identified by the parser. For 
example, the resolution of a pronoun will be 
skipped altogether if its role as a verb argu
ment is missed by the parser. Partial parses 
will also affect the identification of EE bound
aries, on which the focus update rules depend. 
For example, if the parser fails to attach a pre
positional phrase containing an antecedent, it 
will then be missed from the focus registers and 
so the IRs (see (Azzam, 1995)). The simple 
LaSIE approach, however, will be unaffected in 
this case. 
Recall is also lost due to the more restricted 
proposal of candidate antecedents in the focus
based approach. The simple LaSIE approach 
proposes antecedents from each preceding para
graph until one is accepted, while the focus
based approach suggests a single fixed set. 
From a theoretical point of view, many 
interesting issues appear with a large set of 
examples, discussed here only briefly because 
of lack of space. Firstly, the fundamental 
assumption of the focus-based approach, that 
the focus is favoured as an antecedent, does 
not always apply. For example: 
In June, a few weeks before the crash of 
TWA Flight 800, leaders of several Middle 
Eastern terrorist organizations met in Te
heran to plan terrorist acts. Among them 
was the PFL of Palestine, an organization that 
has been linked to airplane bombings in the past. 
Here, the pronoun them corefers with organiz
ations rather than the focus leaders. Additional 
information will be required to override the tim
damental assumption. 
Another significant question is when sentence 
focus changes. In our algorithm, focus changes 
when there is no reference (pronominal or 
otherwise) to the current focus in the current 
77 
EE. In the example used in section 4.1, this 
causes the focus at the end of the first sentence 
to be that of the last EE in that sentence, 
thus allowing the pronoun it in the subsequent 
sentence to be correctly resolved with the plane. 
However in the example below, the focus of 
the first EE (the writ) is the antecedent of the 
pronoun it in the subsequent sentence, rather 
than the focus fl'om the last EE (the ...flight): 
The writ is for "damages" of seven pas
sengers who died when the Airbus A310 flight 
crashed. It claims the deaths were caused by 
negligence. 
Updating focus after the complete sentence, 
rather than each EE, would propose the cor
rect antecedent in this case. However neither 
strategy has a significant overall advantage in 
our evaluations on the MUC corpora. 
Another important factor is the priorities of 
the Interpretation Rules. For example, when a 
personal pronoun can corefer with both CF and 
AF, IRs select the CF first in our algorithm. 
However, this priority is not fixed, being based 
only on the corpora used so thr, which raises the 
possibility of automatically acquiring IR prior
ities through training on other corpora. 
7 Conclusion

A focus-based approach to pronoun resolution 
has been implemented within the LaSIE IE sys
tem and evaluated on real-world texts. The res
ults show no significant preformance increase 
over a simpler heuristic-based approach. The 
main limitation of the fbcus-based approach is 
its reliance on a robust syntactic/semantic ana
lysis to find the focus on which all the IRs 
depend. Examining performance on the real
world data also raises questions about the the
oretical assumptions of focus-based approaches, 
in particular whether fbcus is always a favoured 
antecedent, or whether this depends, to some 
extent, on discourse style. 
Analysing the differences in the results of the 
focusand non-focus~based approaches, does 
show that the focus-based rules are commonly 
required when the simple syntactic and se
mantic rules propose a set of equivalent ante
cedents and can only select, say, the closest ar
bitrarily. A combined approach is therefore sug
gested, but whether this would be more effect
ive than further refining the resolution rules of 
the focus-ba~ed approach, or improving parse 
results and adding more detailed semantic con
straints, remains an open question. 

References 

S. Azzam, K. Humphreys, and R. Gaizauskas. 1998. Coreference resolution in a multilingum information extraction system. In Proceedings of the First Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC). Linguistic Coreference Workshop. 

S. Azzam. 1995. Anaphors, PPs and Disambiguation Process for conceptual analysis. In Proceedings of l~th IJCAL 

S. Azzam. 1996. Resolving anaphors in embedded sentences. In Proceedings of 3~th A CL. 

R. Gaizauskas, T. Wakao, K Humphreys, H. Cunningham, and Y. Wilks. 1995. Description of the LaSIE system. In Proceedings of MUC-6, pages 207--220. Morgan Kaufmann. 

R. Gaizauskas. 1995. XI: A Knowledge Representation Language Based oi1 Cross Classification and Inheritance. Technical Report CS-95-24, University of Sheffield. 

R. Grishnmn and B. Sundheim. 1996. Message Understanding Conference 6: A brief history. In Proceedings of 16th IJCAI, pages 466-471. 

J.S. Gruber. 1976. Lezical structures in syntax and semantics. North-Holland. 

K. Humphreys, R. Gaizauskas, S. Azzam, C. Huyck, B. Mitchell, H. Cunningham, and Y. Wilks. 1998. Description of the LaSIE-II system. In Proceedings of MUC-7. Forthcoming. 

D. Lin. 1995. Description of the PIE System. In Pwceedings of MUC-6, pages 113-126. Morgan Kaufmann. 

C. Sidner. 1981. Focusing for interpretation of pronouns. American Journal of Computational Linguistics, 7:217-231. 

G. Thurmair. 1996. AVENTINUS System Architecture. AVENTINUS project report LEI 2238. 

M. Vilain, J. Burger, J. Aberdeen, D. Connolly, and L. Hirschman. 1995. A model-theoretic coreference scoring scheme. In Proceedings of MUCo6, pages 45-52. Morgan Kaufmann. 78 

