Information Classification and Navigation 
Based on 5WIH of the Target Information 
Takahiro Ikeda and Akitoshi Okumura and Kazunori Muraki 
C&C Media Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation 
4-1-1 Miyazaki, Miyamae-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 216 
Abstract 
This paper proposes a method by which 5W1H (who, 
when, where, what, why, how, and predicate) infor
mation is used to classify and navigate Japanese
language texts. 5WlH information, extracted from 
text data, has an access platform with three func
tions: episodic retrieval, multi-dimensional classi
fication, and overall classification. In a six-month 
trial, the platform was used by 50 people to access 
6400 newspaper articles. The three functions proved 
to be effective for office documentation work and the 
precision of extraction was approximately 82%. 
1 Introduction

In recent years, we have seen an explosive growth 
in the volume of information available through on
line networks and from large capacity storage de
vices. High-speed and large-scale retrieval tech
niques have made it possible to receive information 
through information services such as news clipping 
and keyword-based retrieval. However, information 
retrieval is not a purpose in itself, but a means in 
most cases. In office work, users use retrieval ser
vices to create various documents such as proposals 
and reports. 
Conventional retrieval services do not provide 
users with a good access platform to help them 
achieve their practical purposes (Sakamoto, 1997; 
Lesk et al., 1997). They have to repeat retrieval 
operations and classify the data for themselves. 
To overcome this difficulty, this paper proposes 
a method by which 5W1H (who, when, where, 
what, why, how, and predicate) information can 
be used to classify and navigate Japanese-language 
texts. 5WlH information provides users with easy
to-understand classification axes and retrieval keys 
because it has a set of fundamental elements needed 
to describe events. 
In this paper, we discuss common information 
retrieval requirements for office work and describe 
the three functions that our access platform us
ing 5W1H information provides: episodic retrieval, 
multi-dimensional classification, and overall classifi
cation. We then discuss 5WlH extraction methods, 
and, finally, we report on the results of a six-month 
trial in which 50 people, linked to a company in
tranet, used the platform to access newspaper arti
cles. 
2 Retrieval
Requirements In an 
Office 
Information retrieval is an extremely important part 
of office work, and particularly crucial in the creation 
of office documents. The retrieval requirements in 
office work can be classified into three types. 
Episodic viewpoint: We are often required to 
make an episode, temporal transition data on a cer
tain event. For example, "Company X succeeded 
in developing a two-gigabyte memory" makes the 
user want to investigate what kind of events were 
announced about Company X's memory before this 
event. The user has to collect the related events 
and then arrange them in temporal order to make 
an episode. 
Comparative viewpoint: The comparative view
point is familiar to office workers. For example, 
when the user fills out a purchase request form to 
buy a product, he has to collect comparative infor
mation on price, performance and so on, from several 
companies. Here, the retrieval is done by changing 
retrieval viewpoints. 
Overall viewpoint: An overall viewpoint is neces
sary when there is a large amount of classification 
data. When a user produces a technical analysis re
port after collecting electronics-related articles from 
a newspaper over one year, the amount of data is 
too large to allow global tendencies to be interpreted 
such as when the events occurred, what kind of com
panies were involved, and what type of action was 
required. Here, users have to repeat retrieval and 
classification by choosing appropriate keywords to 
condense classification so that it is not too broad
ranging to understand. 
571 
I Overall class!ficatio n \] 
Episodic 
retrieval 
 Mu,ti-dimensiona, /'/' ~ ',,,~ 
classification 
Figure 1: 5WIH classification and navigation 
3 5W1H Classification and 
Navigation 
Conventional keyword-based retrieval does not con
sider logical relationships between keywords. For ex
ample, the condition, "NEC & semiconductor &: pro
duce" retrieves an article containing "NEC formed 
a technical alliance with B company, and B com
pany produced semiconductor X." Mine et al. and 
Satoh et al. reported that this problem leads to re
trieval noise and unnecessary results (Mine et al., 
1997; Satoh and Muraki, 1993). This problem makes 
it difficult to meet the requirements of an office be
cause it produces retrieval noise in these three types 
of operations. 
5WlH information is who, when, where, what, 
why, how, and predicate information extracted from 
text data through the 5WlH extraction module us
ing language dictionary and sentence analysis tech
niques. 5W1H extraction modules assign 5W1H in
dexes to the text data. The indexes are stored in list 
form of predicates and arguments (when, who, what, 
why, where, how) (Lesk et al., 1997). The 5W1H 
index can suppress retrieval noise because the in
dex considers the logical relationships between key
words. For example, the 5W1H index makes it pos
sible to retrieve texts using the retrieval condition 
"who: NEC & what: semiconductor & predicate: 
produce." It can filter out the article containing 
"NEC formed a technical alliance with B company, 
and B company produced semiconductor X." 
Based on 5WlH information, we propose a 5W1H 
classification and navigation model which can meet 
office retrieval requirements. The model has three 
functions: episodic retrieval, multi-dimensional clas
sification, and overall classification (Figure 1). 
3.1 Episodic
Retrieval 
The 5W1H index can easily do episodic retrieval 
by choosing a set of related events and arranging 
96.10 NEC adjusts semiconductor l.~roduction downward. 
96.12 
97.1 
97.4 
97.5 
NEC postpones semiconductor production plant 
construction. 
NEC shifts semiconductor production to 64 Megabit next 
generation DRAMs. 
NEC invests ¥ 40 billion for next generation 
semiconductor production. 
NEC semiconductor production 18% more than 
expected. 
Figure 2: Episodic retrieval example 
..... ...... 
co~ ....... HD ....... 
¸ 
Figure 3: Multi-dimensional classification example 
the events in temporal order. The results are read
able by users as a kind of episode. For example, 
an NEC semiconductor production episode is made 
by retrieving texts containing "who: NEC & what: 
semiconductor & predicate: product" indexes and 
sorting the retrieved texts in temporal order (Figure 
2). 
The 5W1H index can suppress retrieval noise by 
conventional keyword-based retrieval such as "NEC 
& semiconductor & produce." Also, the result is an 
easily readable series of events which is able to meet 
episodic viewpoint requirements in office retrieval. 
3.2 Multi-dimensional Classification 
The 5W1H index has seven-dimensional axes for 
classification. Texts are classified into categories on 
the basis of whether they contain a certain combi
nation of 5WlH elements or not. Though 5W1H 
elements create seven-dimensional space, users are 
provided with a two-dimensional matrix because this 
makes it easier for them to understand text distri
bution. Users can choose a fundamental viewpoint 
from 5WlH elements to be the vertical axis. The 
other elements are arranged on the horizontal axis 
as the left matrix of Figure 3 shows. Classification 
makes it possible to access data from a user's com
parative viewpoints by combining 5WlH elements. 
For example, the cell specified by NEC and PC 
shows the number of articles containing NEC as a 
"who" element and PC as a "what" element. 
Users can easily obtain comparable data by 
switching their fundamental viewpoint from the 
572 
Who 
NEC opens a new intemet service. 
Electric A Corp. develops a new computer. 
Company 
B lncl puts a portable terminal on the market. 
Communi~" C Telecommunication starts a virtual market. 
cation '" D Telephone sells a communication adapter. 
Figure 4: Overall classification example 
"who" viewpoint to the "what" viewpoint, for ex
ample, as the right matrix of Figure 3 shows. This 
meets comparative viewpoint requirements in office 
retrieval. 
3.3 Overall
Classification 
When there are a large number of 5WlH elements, 
the classification matrix can be packed by using a 
thesaurus. As 5W1H elements are represented by 
upper concepts in the thesaurus, the matrix can be 
condensed. Figure 4 has an example with six "who" 
elements which are represented by two categories. 
The matrix provides users with overall classification 
as well as detailed sub-classification through the se
lection of appropriate hierarchical levels. This meets 
overall classification requirements in office retrieval. 
4 5WIH Information Extraction 
5WIH extraction was done by a case-based shal
low parsing (CBSP) model based on the algorithm 
used in the VENIEX, Japanese information extrac
tion system (Muraki et al., 1993). CBSP is a robust 
and effective method of analysis which uses lexical 
information, expression patterns and case-markers 
in sentences. Figure 5 shows the detail on the algo
rithm for CBSP. 
In this algorithm, input sentences are first seg
mented into words by Japanese morphological anal
ysis (Japanese sentences have no blanks between 
words.) Lexical information is linked to each word 
such as the part-of-speech, root forms and semantic 
categories. 
Next, 5WlH elements are extracted by proper 
noun extraction, pattern expression matching and 
c~Lse-maker matching. 
In the proper noun extraction phase, a 60 060
word proper noun dictionary made it possible to 
indicate people's names and organization names as 
"who" elements and place names as "where" ele
ments. For example, NEC and China are respec
tively extracted as a "who" element and a "where" 
procedure CBSP; 
begin 
Apply morphological analysis to the sentence; 
foreach word in the sentence do begin 
if the word is a people's name or 
an organization name then 
Mark the word as a "who" element and 
push it to the stack; 
else if the word is a place name then 
Mark the word as a "where" element and 
push it to the stack; 
else if the word matches an organization 
name pattern then 
Mark the word as a "who" element and 
push it to the stack; 
else if the word matches a date pattern then 
Mark the word as a "when" element and 
push it to the stack; 
else if the word is a noun then 
if the next word is ~¢ or t~: then 
Mark the word and the kept unspecified 
elements as "who" elements and 
push them to the stack; 
if the next word is ~ or t2 then 
Mark the word and the kept unspecified 
elements as "what" elements and 
push them to the stack; 
else 
Keep the word as an unspecified element; 
else if the word is a verb then begin 
Fix the word as the predicate element of 
a 5WlH set; 
repeat 
Pop one marked word from the stack; 
if the 5W1H element 
corresponding to the mark 
of the word is not fixed then 
Fix the word as the 5W1H element 
corresponding to its mark; 
else 
break repeat; 
until stack is empty; 
end 
end 
end 
Figure 5: The algorithm for CBSP 
element from the sentence, "NEC ~ O0 \[\] %~'-~/fik ~c 
~JS_~o (NEC produces semiconductors in China.)" 
In the pattern expression matching phase, the sys
tem extracts words matching predefined patterns as 
"who" and "when" elements. There are several typ
573 
Table 1: The results of evaluation for "who, .... what," and "predicate" elements and overall extracted 
information. 
"Who" elements "What" elements "Predicate" elements 
Present Absent Total Present Absent Total Present Absent Total Overall 
Correct 5423 71 5494 5653 50 5703 6042 5 6047 5270 
Error 414 490 904 681 14 695 55 296 351 1128 
Total 5837 561 6398 6334 64 6398 6097 301 6398 6396 
Precision 92.9% 12.7% 85.9% 89.2% 78.1% 89.1% 99.1% 1.7% 94.5% 82.4% 
ical patterns for organization names and people's 
names, dates, and places (Muraki et al., 1993). For 
example, nouns followed by/~J: (Co., Inc. Ltd.) and 
:~-~ (Univ.) mean they are organizations and "who" 
elements. For example, 1998 ~ 4 ~ 18 H (April 18, 
1998) can be identified as a date. "When" elements 
can be recognized by focusing on the pattern for 
(year), jq (month), and \[~ (day). 
For words which are not extracted as 5W1H el
ements in previous phases, the system decides its 
5WlH index by case marker matching. The system 
checks the relationships between Japanese particles 
(case markers) and verbs and assigns a 5W1H in
dex to each word according to rules such as ~" is a 
marker of a "who" element and ~ is a marker of a 
"what" element. In the example "A SJ:~ X ~: 
~-~ (Company A sells product X.)," company A is 
identified as a "who" element according to the case 
marker ~" if it is not specified as a "who" clement 
by proper noun extraction and pattern expression 
matching. 
5W1H elements followed by a verb (predicate) axe 
fixed as a 5WIH set so that a 5W1H set does not 
include two elements for the same 5W1H index. A 
5W1H element belongs to the same 5WlH set as the 
nearest predicate after it. 
5 Information
Access Platform 
5W1H information classification and navigation 
works in the information access platform. The plat
form disseminates users with newspaper information 
through the company intranet. The platform struc
ture is shown in Figure 6. 
Web robots collect newspaper articles from spec
ified URLs every day. The data is stored in the 
database, and a 5W1H index data is made for the 
data. Currently, 6398 news articles are stored in the 
databases. Some articles are disseminated to users 
according to their profiles. Users can browse all the 
data through WWW browsers and use 5W1H classi
fication and navigation functions by typing sentences 
or specifying regions in the browsing texts. 
extraction I I Multi~ 
I _, I dimensional " '-~ ~-~1 classificatio._.._ n 
H L J l I retrieval / 
-'-'-------'-'/ Overall ~ classificatior 
U 
S 
E 
R 
S 
Figure 6: Information access interface structure 
5WIH elements are automatically extracted from 
the typed sentences and specified regions. The ex
tracted 5WlH elements are used as retrieval keys for 
episodic retrieval, and as axes for multi-dimensional 
classification and overall classification. 
5.1 5W1H Information Extraction 
"When," "who," "what," and "predicate" informa
tion has been extracted from 6398 electronics in
dustry news articles since August, 1996. We have 
evaluated extracted information for 6398 news head
lines. The headline average length is approximately 
12 words. Table 1 shows the result of evaluating 
"who," "what," and "predicate" information and 
overall extracted information. 
In this table, the results are classified with re
gard to the presence of corresponding elements in the 
news headlines. More than 90% of "who," "what," 
and "predicate" elements can correctly be extracted 
with our extraction algorithm from headlines having 
such elements. On the other hand, the algorithm 
is not highly precise when there is no correspond
ing element in the article. The errors axe caused 
by picking up other elements despite the absence 
of the element to be extracted. However, the er
rors hardly affect applications such as episodic re
574 
i ; : s :, : srr: r::: : 
\[96112/20\] , ~ . O" " ~H,~ ~ 
Figure 7: Episodic retrieval example (2) 
trieval and multi-dimensiotml classification because 
they only add unnecessary information and do not 
remove necessary information. 
The precision independent of the presence of the 
element is from 85% to 95% for each, and the overall 
precision is 82.4%. 
5.1.1 Episodic
Retrieval 
Figure 7 is an actual screen of Figure 2, which shows 
an example of episodic retrieval based on headline 
news saying, "NEC :~©~ ~ :fi~:J: ~) 18%I~ 
(NEC produces 18% more semiconductors than ex
pected.)" The user specifies the region, "NEC ~ 
~;i~©-~-~ (NEC produces semiconductors)" on 
the headline for episodic retrieval. A "who" element 
NEC, a "what" element ~k (semiconductor), and 
a "predicate" element ~J£N (produce) are episodic re
trieval keys. The extracted results are NEC's semi
conductor production story. 
The upper frame of the window lists a set of head
lines arranged in temporal order. In each article, 
NEC is a "who" element, the semiconductor is a 
"what" element and production is a "predicate" el
ement. By tracing episodic headlines, the user can 
find that the semiconductor market wa~s not good at 
the end of 1996 but that it began turning around 
in 1997. The lower frame shows an article corre
sponding to the headline in the upper frame. When 
the user clicks the 96/10/21 headline, the complete 
article is displayed in the lower frame. 
5.1.2 Multi-dimensional Classification 
Figures 8 and 9 show multi-dimensional classifica
tion results based on the headline, "NEC • A ~J: • 
Co., and B Co. are developing encoded data recov
\[~\] 
\[I~3K--~. F-~ 4,,--\] 
\[96110102\] NFC pEM~j~7)'I\[-~-.x'--)L.BI~J~'~,'.)WF'~\[~I~ ',$~' 
Figure 8: Multi-dimensional classification example 
(2) 
\[~:'~ "~ i~;~ 
.I 
\[96109112\] B~t\]: ~'-¢7"~7~'~/U~=~0)~4L~:X~-\]~. ~'~ 
Figure 9: Multi-dimensional classification example 
(3) 
cry techniques.)." "Who" elements are "NEC, A 
Co., and B Co." listed on the vertical axis which is 
the fundamental axis in the upper frame of Figure 
"H ~z~u (encode), ~-'-8. "What" elements are ~ ,J~u 
(data), \[0\]~ (recovery), and ~$i (technique)." A 
"predicate" element is a "~\]~; (develop)." "What" 
and "predicate" elements are both arranged oi, the 
horizontal axis in the upper frame of Figure 8. When 
clicking a cell for "who": NEC and "what": H~:~'f~ 
(encode), users can see the headlines of articles con
taining the above two keywords in the lower frame 
of Figure 8. 
When clicking on the "What" cell in the upper 
575 
.......... ~ ....... : ....... .,,.,...~. ~,..~,~.:o :.,w ~, ;.... ; 
g U 
1i~; it~ ~ 
• ,~11 .. 
: l~m#l~ ,.,J)J~Jml( 
Figure 10: Overall classification for 97/4 news 
....... N It 
) " ....... ?i: .... i : U 
..... £ 
Figure 11: Overall sub-classification for 97/4 news 
frame of Figure 8, the user can switch the funda
mental axis from "who" to "what" (Figure 9, up
per frame). By switching the fundamental axis, the 
user can easily see classification from different view
points. On clicking the cell for "what": H~{L (en
code) and "predicate": ~ (develop), the user finds 
eight headlines (Figure 9, lower frame). The user 
can then see different company activities such as the 
97/04/07 headline; "C ~J: ~o f:~-'-~ ~-~ 
~-fL~ ~7~ (C Company has developed data 
transmission encoding technology using a satellite)," 
shown in the lower frame of Figure 9. 
In this way, a user can classify article headlines by 
switching 5WlH viewpoints. 
5.1.3 Overall
Classification 
Overall classification is condensed by using an orga
nization and a technical thesaurus. The organization 
thesaurus has three layers and 2800 items, and the 
technical thesaurus has two layers and 1000 techni= 
cal terms. "Who" and "what" elements are respec
tively represented by the upper classes of the orga
nization thesaurus and the technical thesaurus. The 
upper classes are vertical and horizontal elements in 
the multi-dimensional classification matrix. "Pred
icate" elements are categorized by several frequent 
predicates based on the user's priorities. 
Figure 10 shows the results of overall classifica
tion for 250 articles disseminated in April, 1997. 
Here, "who" elements on the vertical axis are rep
resented by industry categories instead of company 
names, and "what" elements on the horizontal axis 
are represented by technical fields instead of tech
nical terms. On clicking the second cell from the 
top of the "who" elements, ~J~ (electrical and 
mechanical) in Figure 10, the user can view subcat
egorized classification on electrical and mechanical 
industries as indicated in Figure 11. Here, ~:~,~J~ 
(electrical and mechanical) is expanded to the sub
~'~-~-~ (general electric) J~ (power categories; ~, ~ ~ 
electric), ~.J~ (home electric), ~f~j~ (commu
nication), and so on. 
6 Current
Status 
The information access platform was exploited dur
ing the MIIDAS (Multiple Indexed Information Dis
semination and Acquisition Service) project which 
NEC used internally (Okumura et al., 1997). The 
DEC Alpha workstation (300 MHz) is a server ma
chine providing 5W1H classification and navigation 
functions for 50 users through WWW browsers. 
User interaction occurs through CGI and JAVA pro
grams. 
After a six-month trial by 50 users, four areas for 
improvement become evident. 
1) 5W1H extraction: 5W1H extraction precision was 
approximately 82°/o for newspaper headlines. The 
extraction algorithm should be improved so that it 
can deal with embedded sentences and compound 
sentences. 
Also, dictionaries should be improved in order to be 
able to deal with different domains such as patent 
data and academic papers. 
2) Episodic retrieval: The interface should be im
proved so that the user can switch retrieval from 
episodic to normal retrieval in order to compare re
trieval data. 
Episodic retrieval is based on the temporal sorting 
of a set of related events. At present, geographic ar
rangement is expected to become a branch function 
for episodic retrieval. It is possible to arrange each 
event on a map by using 5W1H index data. This 
would enable users to trace moving events such as 
the onset of a typhoon or the escape of a criminal. 
3) Multi-dimensional classification: Some users need 
to edit the matrix for themselves on the screen. 
576 
Moreover, it is necessary to insert new keywords and 
delete unnecessary keywords. 
7 Related
Work 
SOM (Self-Organization Map) is an effective auto
matic classification method for any data represented 
by vectors (Kohonen, 1990). However, the meaning 
of each cluster is difficult to understand intuitively. 
The clusters have no logical meaning because they 
depend on a keyword set based on the frequency that 
keywords occur. 
Scatter/Gather is clustering information based on 
user interaction (Hearst and Pederson, 1995; Hearst 
et al., 1995). Initial cluster sets are based on key
word frequencies. 
GALOIS/ULYSSES is a lattice-based classifica
tion system and the user can browse information on 
the lattice produced by the existence of keywords 
(Carpineto and Romano, 1995). 
5WIIt classification and navigation is unique in 
that it is based on keyword functions, not on the 
existence of keywords. 
Lifestream manages e-mail by focusing on tempo
ral viewpoints (Freeman and Fertig, 1995). In this 
sense, this idea is similar to our episodic retrieval 
though the purpose and target are different. 
Mine et al. and Hyodo and Ikeda reported on the 
effectiveness of using dependency relations between 
keywords for retrieval (Mine et al., 1997; Hyodo and 
Ikeda, 1994). 
As the 5W1H index is more informative than sim
ple word dependency, it is possible to create more 
functions. More informative indexing such as se
mantic indexing and com:eptual indexing can the
oretically provide more sophisticated classification. 
However, this indexing is not always successful for 
practical use because of semantic analysis difficul
ties. Consequently 5Wltt is the most appropriate 
indexing method from the practical viewpoint. 
8 Conclusion

This paper proposed a method by which 5W1H 
(who, when, where, what, why, how, and predi
cate) information is used to classify and navigate 
Japanese-language texts. 5WlH information, ex
tracted from text data, provides an access plat
form with three functions: episodic retrieval, multi
dimensional classification, and overall classification. 
In a six-month trial, the platform was used by 50 
people to access 6400 newspaper articles. 
The three functions proved to be effective for of
rice documentation work and the extraction preci
sion was approximately 82%. 
Wc intend to make a more quantitative evaluation 
by surveying more users about the functions. We 
also plan to improve the 5W1H extraction algorithm, 
dictionaries and the user interface. 
Acknowledgment 
We would like to thank Dr. Satoshi Goto and Dr. 
Takao Watanabe for their encouragement and con
tinued support throughout this work. 
We also appreciate the contribution of Mr. 
Kenji Satoh, Mr. Takayoshi Ochiai, Mr. Satoshi 
Shimokawara, and Mr. Masahito Abe to this work. 

References 

C. Carpineto and G. Romano. 1995. A system for 
conceptual structuring and hybrid navigation of text 
database. In AAAI FaU Symposium on AI Application 
in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval, pages 2025. 

E. Freeman and S. Fertig. 1995. Lifestreams: Organiz
ing your electric life. In AAAI Fall Symposium on AI 
Application in Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval, 
pages 38-44. 

M. A. Hearst and J. O. Pcderson. 1995. Revealing col
lection structure through information access interface. 
In Proceedings of IJCAI'95, pages 2047-2048. 

M. A. Hearst, D. R. Karger, and J. O. Pederson. 1995. 
Scatter/gather ms a tool for navigation of retrieval re
sults. In AAAI Fall Symposium on AI Application in 
Knowledge Navigation and Retrieval, pages 65-71. 

Y. Hyodo and T. Ikeda. 1994. Text retrieval system used 
on structure matching. The Transactions of The Insti
tute of Electronics, Information and Communication 
Engineers, J77-D-II(5): 1028-1030. 

T. Kohonen. 1990. The self-organizing map. In Proceed
ings of IEEE, volume 78, pages 1059-1063. 

M. Lesk, D. Cutting, J. Pedersen, T. Noreault, and M. Koll. 1997. Real life information retrieval: com-
mercial search engines. In Proceedings of SIGIR'97, 
page 333, July. 

T. Mine, K. Aso, and M. Amamiya. 1997. Japanese 
document retrieval system on www using depen
dency relations between words. In Proceedings of PA
CLING'97, pages 290-215, September. 

K. Muraki, S. Doi, and S. Ando. 1993. Description of 
the veniex system ms used for muc-r. In P~veecdings 
of MUCS, pages 147-159, August. 

A. Okumura, T. Ikeda, and K. Muraki. 1997. Selec
tive dissemination of information based on a multiple
ontology. In Proceedings of IJCAI'97 Ontology Work
shop, pages 138-145, August. 

H. Sakamoto. 1997. Natural language processing tech
nology for information. In JEIDA NLP Workshop, 
July. 

K. Satoh and K. Muraki. 1993. Penstation for idea pro
cessing. In Proceedings of NLPRS'93, pages 153-158, 
December. 

