Locating noun phrases with finite state transducers. 
Jean Senellart 
LADL (Laboratoire d'automatique documentaire et linguistique.) 
Universitd Paris VII 
2, place Jussieu 
75251 PARIS Cedex 05 
emaih senella@ladl.j ussieu.fr 
Abstract 
We present a method for constructing, main
taining and consulting a database of proper 
nouns. We describe noun phrases composed of 
a proper noun and/or a description of a hu
man occupation. They are formalized by finite 
state transducers (FST) and large coverage dic
tionaries and are applied to a corpus of news
papers. We take into account synonymy and 
hyperonymy. This first stage of our parsing pro
cedure has a high degree of accuracy. Wc show 
how we can handle requests such as: 'Find all 
newspaper articles in a general corl)us mention
ing the French prime minister', or 'How is Mr. X 
referred to in the corpus; what have been his dif
ferent occupations through out the period over 
which our corpus extends?' In the first case, non 
trivial occurrences of noun phrases are located, 
that is phrases not containing words present 
in the request, but either synonyms, or proper 
nouns relevant to request. The results of the 
search is far better than than those obtained by 
a key-word based engine. Most answers are cor
rect: except some cases of honmnymy (where a 
human reader would also fail without more con
text). Also, the treatment of people having sev
eral different occupations is not frilly resolved. 
Wc have built for Prenctl, a library of about one 
thousand such FSTs, and English FSTs are un
der construction. The same method can bc used 
to locate and propose new proper nouns, sin> 
ply by replacing given proper names in the same 
FSTs by variables. 
1 Introduction

Information Retrieval in full tcxts is one of the 
challenges of the next years. Web engines at
tempt to select among the millions of existing 
Web Sites, those corresponding to some input 
request. Newspaper archives is another exam
1212 
ple: there are several gigabytcs of news on elec
tronic support, and the size is increasing ev
cry day. Different approaches have been pro
posed to retrieve precise information in a large 
database of natural texts: 
1. Key-words algorithms (e.g. Yahoo): co
occurrences of the different words of tile 
request are searched for in one same doc
mnent. Generally, slight variations of 
spelling are allowed to take into account 
grammatical endings and typing errors. 
2. Exact pattern algorithms (e.g. OED): se
quences containing occurrences described 
by a regular expression on characters are 
located. 
3. Statistical algorithms (e.g. LiveTopic): 
they offer to the user documents containing 
words of the request and also words that 
are statistically and semantically close with 
respect of clustering or factorial analysis. 
The first method is the simplest one: it 
generally provides results with an important 
noise (documents containing homographs of the 
words of the request, not in relation with the re
quest, or documents containing words that have 
a form very close to that of the request, but with 
a different meaning). 
The second method yields excellent results, to 
the extent that the pattern of the request is suf
ficiently complex, and thus allows specification 
of synonymous forms. Also, the different grain
matical endings can be described precisely. The 
drawback of such precision is the difficulty to 
build and handle complex requests. 
The third approach can provide good results 
for a very simple request. But, as any statis
tical method, it needs docmnents of a huge size, 
and thus, cannot take into account words occur
ring a limited mtmber of times in the database, 
which is the case of roughly one word out of two, 
according Zipf's law I (Zipf, 1932). 
We are particularly interested in finding noun 
phrases containing or referring to proper nouus, 
in order to answer the following requests: 
1. Who is John Major? 
2. Find all document referring to John Major. 
3. Find all people, who have been French min
isters of culture. 
With the key-word method, texts containing the 
sequence 'John Major 'are found, but also, texts 
containing 'a UN PTvtection Force, Major Rob 
Anninck', 'P. Major', 'a former Long Islander, 
John Jacques' and 'Mr. Major'. 
The statistical approach will probably succeed 
(supposing the text is large enough) in associ
ating the words John Major, with tim words 
Britain, prime and minister. Therefore, it 
would provide documents containing the se
quence 'the prime minister, John Major', but 
also 'the French prime minister' or 'Timothy 
Eggar, Britain's energy minister' which have 
exactly the same number of correctly associ
ated words. Such answers are an inevitable 
consequence of any method not grammatically 
founded. 
M. Gross and J. Senellart (1998) have proposed 
a preprocessing step of the text which groups up 
to 50 % of the words of the text into compound 
utterances. By hiding irrelevant meanings of 
simple words which are part of compounds, they 
obtain more relevant tokens. In the preceding 
example, the minimal tokens would be the cons
pound nouns 'prime minister' or 'energy minis
ter', thus, tile statistical engine could slot have 
misinterpreted the word 'minister' in 'energy 
minister' and in 'prime minister'. 
We propose here a new method based on a for
real and full description of the specific phrases 
actually used to describe occupations. We also 
use large coverage dictionaries, and libraries of 
general purpose finite state transducers. Our 
algorithm finds answers to questions of types 1, 
2 and 3, with nearly no errors disc to silence, 
or to noise. The few cases of remaining errors 
are treated in section 5 and we show, that in 
order to avoid them by a general method, one 
must i)erfo,'m a complete syntactic analysis of 
1 This
is true whatever the size of the database is. 
tile sentence. 
Our algorithIn has three different applications. 
First, by using dictionaries of proper nouns and 
local grammars describing occupations, it an
swers requests. Synonylns and hyponyms are 
formally treated, as well as the chronological 
evolution of the corpus. By consulting a pre
processed index of the database, it provides re
sults in real time. The second application of the 
algorithm consists in replacing proper nouns in 
FSTs by variables, and use them to locate and 
propose to tile user new proper nouns slot listed 
in dictionaries. In this way, tile construction of 
the library of FSTs and of tile dictionaries can 
be automated at least in part. The third ap
plication is automatic translation of such noun 
phrases, by constructing the equivalent trans
ducers in the different languages. 
In section 2, wc provide the formal description 
of the problem, and we show how we can use au
tonmton representations. Ill section 3, we show 
how we can handlc requests. In section 4, we 
give some examples. In section 5, we analyze 
failed answers. In section 6, we show how we 
use transducers to enrich a dictionary. 
2 Formal
Description 
We deal with noun phrases containing a de
scription of all occupation, a proper noun, or 
both combined. For example, 'a senior RAF 
officer', 'Peter Lilley, the Shadow Chancellor', 
'Sir 7~renee Burns, the 75"easury Permanent 
Secretary' or 'a former Haitian prime minister, 
Rosny Smarth'. For our purl)ose, we must have 
a formal way of describing and identifying such 
sequences. 
2.1 Description
of occupations 
We describe occupations by means of local 
grammars, which are directly written in the 
form of FS graphs. These graphs are equivalent 
to FSTs with inverted representation (FST) 
(Roche and Sehabes, 1997) as in figure 1, where 
each box rel)resents a transition of the automa
ton (inl)ut of the transducer), and the label 
under a box is an output of the transducer. The 
initial state is the left arrow, the final state is 
the double square. The optional grey boxes, (cf 
figure 2), represent sub-transducers: in other 
words, by 'zoonfing' on all sub-transducers, 
we view a given FST as a simple graph, with 
no parts singled out. However, we insist on 
1213 
Figure 2: MinisterOccupation.graph 
ab 
Figure 1: Formal example 
keeping sub-FST automata; as they will be 
computed independently, and as they allow 
us to keep a simple representation of complex 
constructions. The output of a grey box: is 
the output of the sub-transducer. The symbol 
labeled <E> represents the void transition, 
and the different lines inside arc parallel 
transitions. Such a representation is convenient 
to formulate linguistic constraints. A graph 
editor (Silberztein, 1993) is available to directly 
construct FSTs. In theory, such FSTs are more 
powerful than traditional FSTs 2. 
In figure 1, the transducer recognizcs thc 
sequences a, b, ca, eb. To each of these 
input sequences, it associates an output noted 
val(input). Here, val(a) = {ab}, val(b) = {b}, 
2 If
a sub-automaton refers to a parent automaton, 
we will be able to express context dependent words such 
as anb n . 
val(c) is not defined as c is not recognized 
by the automaton, val(ca) = {d}, and 
val(cb) = {b}. 
Wc define an ordering relation on the set of 
recognized sequences by a transducer T, that 
is: x <_7 y ¢* VeEval(x), eCval(y). In our 
example, b <_7a and b =7cb with derived 
equality relation. 
We construct our transducer describing occu
pations in such a way that with this ordering 3 
relation: 
Two sequences x, y are synonyms if and only 
if x ---7y 
The sequence y is an hyponym of x (i.e. y 
is a x) if and only if x <_7y. 
The transducer in figure 2 describes 4 diffcrent 
sequences referring to the word minister. 
Sub-parts of the transducers Country and 
Nationality are given in figure 3 and 4. 
By construction, all the sequences recognized 
are grammatically correct. For example, the 
variant of minister o/European affairs: minis
ter/or European affairs is recognized, but not 
3 The
equality relation =T and the strict comparison 
are directly deduced from _<T definition. ,i For tile sake of clarity, it is not complete, for exam
ple it doesn't take into account regional ministries as in 
USA or in India. It doesn't represent either the sequence 
deputy prime minister. Moreover, a large part could be 
factorized in a sub-automaton. 
1214 
Chine~ 
Figure 3: Country.graph 
Chillc.~ 
Figure 4: Nationality.graph 
French minister for agriculture. The output of 
the transducer is compatible with our definition 
of order: 
• val(France's culture minister) 
=T {French, minister, Culture} 
=7val(culture minister of France) 
>>_T val(15"ench minister) 
• 'chancellor of the Exchequer'=T'finance 
minister' 
• 'prime minister'>_T'minister' i.e. a 
primc minister is a minister but 'deputy 
minister'~_T'minister' i.e. a deputy minister is 
not a minister. 
Reciprocally, given an output, it easy to find 
all paths corresponding to this output (by 
inverting the inputs and the outputs in the 
transducer). This will be very usefifl to formu
late answers to requests, or to translate noun 
phrases: the ':natural language" sequences 
corresponding to the set {minister, French} 
are : "French minister" or "minister of France". 
We will note val-l({minister, French}) = 
{'french minister', 'minister of France' }. 
2.2 Full
Name description 
The full name description is based on the 
same methodology (cf. figure 5), except 
that the boxes containing <PN:FirstName> and 
<PN:SurName> represent words of the proper 
nouns dictionaries. The output of this trans
ducer is computed in a different way: the out
put is the surname, the firstname if available, 
and the gender implied either by the firstname, 
or by the short title: Mr., Sir, princess, etc .... 
3 Handling
requests: a dynamic 
dictionary 
In order to instantly obtain answers for all re
quests, we build an incremental index of all 
lnatehes described by the FST library. At 
this stage, the program proposes new possible 
proper nouns not yet listed, they complete the 
dictionary. Our index has the following prop
erty: when an FST is modified, it is not the 
whole library wtfich is recompiled, but only the 
FSTs affected by the modification. We now de
scribe this stage and show how the program con
sults the index and the FST library to construct 
the answer. 
3.1 Constructing
the database 
In (Senellart, 1998), a fast algorithm that 
parses regular expressions on flfil inverted text 
is presented. We use such an algorithm for 
locating occurrences of the FSTs in the text. 
For each FST, and for each of its occurrences 
in the text, wc compute the position, the 
length, and the FST associated output of the 
occurrence. 
This type of index is compressed in the same 
way entries of the flfll inverted text are. This 
choice of structure has the following features: 
1. There is no difference of parsing between 
a 'grey (autonomous) box' and a 'nor
real one'. Once sub-transducers have been 
comt)iled, they behave like normal words. 
Thus, the parsing algorithms are exactly 
the same. 
2. A makefile including dependencies be
tween the different graphs is built, and 
modifications of one graph triggers the 
re-compilation of the graphs directly or 
indirectly del)endent. 
. This structure is incremental: adding new 
texts to the database is easy, we only need 
to index them and to merge the previous 
index with the new one by a trivial pointer 
operation. 
A description of a whole noun phrase is given 
made by the graph of figure 6. 
1215 
.... 
f 
Figure 5: FullNanle.graph 
\] OcCUpation D \[ |:ullNmne l~ / 
Figure 6: NounPhrases.graph, the <A> label stands for any adjective. 
(Information of the general purpose dictionary) 
We use a second structure: a dynamic pTvper 
noun dictionary 79 that relies on the indexes of 
Occupation.graph and FullName.graph. 7) 
is called 'dynamic' dictionary, because the infor
mation associated to the entries depend on the 
locations in the text we are looking for. The 
algorithm that constructs D is the following: 
1. For each recognized occurrence we asso
ciate Ol which is the output of Full
Name.graph and the output 02 of the 
Occupation.graph (see section 4 for ex
amples). 
2. If O1 is not empty, find 01 in D: that is, 
find the last e in 7) such that O1 _<7e. 
If there is none, create one : i.e. associate 
this FullName with the occupation 02 and 
with the current location in the text. 
If there exists one, and its occupation is 
compatible with 02 then add the current 
location to this entry. Or else, create a new 
entry for O1 (eventually completed by the 
information from e) with its new occupa
tion 02, and pointing to the current loca
tion in the text. 
3. If O1 is empty: the noun phrase is limited 
to the occupation part. Find the last entry 
in D compatible with 02, and then add the 
1216 
current location to the entry. 
A detailed run of this algorithm is given in sec
tion 4. 
3.2 Consulting
the database 
Given a request of type 1: Who is P. We first 
apply the NounPhrases.graph to P. If P is 
not recognized, the research fails. It it is rec
ognized, we obtain two outputs O1 and 02 as 
previously mentioned. For this type of request 
O1 cannot be empty. So we look in 79 for the 
entries that match O1 (there can be several, of
ten when the first name is not given, or given 
by its initial). Then, we print the different oc
cupations associated to these entries. 
Given a request of type 2: the result is just an 
extc~sion of the previous case: once we have 
found the entries in D, we print all positions as
sociated in the text. 
Given a request of type 3, the method is 
different: we begin by applying the Noun
Phrases.graph to P. In this case, O1 is empty. 
Then we look up the entries of 7), and check if 
at some location of the text, its occupation is 
compatible with thc occupation of the request. 
4 Examples
of use 
Consider the following chronological extract of 
Prench newspaper : 
1M. Jack Lang, ministre de 1'4ducation nationale et de la cuhure, 
2Charg4 le 7 avril 1992 par M. Lang de rdfldchir aux conditions de 
3M. Jack Lang a lane4 dimanche soir h \]a tdldvision l'id4e d'impliquer 
4Commeatant Faction du ministre de la culture, le premier adjoint 
5En d4finitive l'idde de M. Lang apparMt comme un r~ve ! 
6Le directeur de l'American Ballet Theater, Kevin McKenzie : 
7M. Lang prdsente son pro jet de r4forme des lycdes prdvoyant 
8Tous, sotltenez la loi Lang, par distraction, de temps en temps, icl 
9M. Jack Lang, maire de Blois, a oHiciellement d4posd sa 
i0Sortants : Michel Fromet, suppldant de Jack Lang, se reprdsente 
IiDe son cotd. Carl Lang, secrdtaire gdn4ral du Front national, a 
12et Jack Lang, ancien ministre de l'dducation nationale et de la culture, 
13l'ancien ministre, Jack Lang, et son successeur, Jacques Toubon, 
ldJack l,ang, maire de Blois et an<'ien minlstre, 
15.,,, le nouveau ministre de \]'4ducatlon nationale, Jacques Touboll, 
At the beginning 7) is empty. 
We read the sentence 1: 
01 = {Tn, Jack, Lang}, 
02 = {minister, education, culture}. There is 
no entry in D corresponding to O1, thus we 
create in 79 the following entry : 
SurName=Lang, Fir stName=Jack, Gender=m, 
(Line 1 0ccupatlon-mlnlster,education,culture) 
We read the sentence 2:O1 = {m, Lang}. 01 
matches the only entry in 79, and moreover as 
O2 is empty: it also matchcs the entry. Thus 
we add the line 2, as a reference to this first 
entry. 
SurName=Lang, Fir stName=Jack, Gender=m, 
(Line 1,20¢cupatlon~minlster,education,culture) 
At the end of the processing, 79 equals to: 
SurName=Lang, F irstName= Jack, gender=m, 
(Line 1,2,3.4,5.70ccupationmminister,education,culture) 
(Line 9,12,13,14 Occupation=mayor,Blois) 
SurName=Fromet, FirstName=M± chel, Gender=m, 
(Line 10 Occupation=nainister..deputy.education,cuhure) 
SurN ame=Lang, F irstName=Carl, Gender=m, 
(Line 11 0ccupation-head~party,F~) 
SurName=Toubon, Fir stName=Jacques, Gender=m, 
(Line 13,15 Occupation=n, inister,education) 
Now if we search all parts of the text men
tioning the minister of culture, wc apply 
NounPhrases.graph to this request and we 
find O1 = {}, 02 = {minister, culture}. The 
only entries in 79 matching 02 correspond to 
the lines 1,2,3,4,5,7,13,15. This was expected, 
lines referring to the homonym of Jack Lang 
have not be considered, nor line referring Jack 
Lang designated as the mayor of Blois. 
5 Remaining
errors 
Some cases are difficult to solve, as we can sec 
in the sentence: In China, the first minister has 
.... The first phrase of the sentence: In China is 
an adverbial, and could be located everywhere 
in the sentence. It could even be implicit, that 
is, implied by the rest of the text. In such a 
case, a human reader will need the context, to 
identify the person designated. Wc are not able, 
to extract the information we need, thus the re
sult is not false, but imprecise. 
Another situation leads to wrong results: when 
one santo person has several occupations, and 
is designated sometimes by one, sometinms by 
another. To resolve such a case, we nmst repre
sent the set of occupations that are compatible. 
This is a rather large project on the 'semantics' 
of occupation. 
Finally, as we can see if figure 6, a determiner 
and an adjective can be found between the Full
name part, and the Occupation part. In most 
case, it is something 'this', or 'the', or 'the well
known', or 'our great', and can be easily de
scribed by a FST. But in very exceptional case, 
we can find also COml)lex sequences between the 
Fullnmne part, and the Occupation part. For 
example: 'M. X, who is since 1976, the prime 
minister of ...'. In this case, it is not possible, 
in the current state of the developpment of out 
FST library, to provide a complete description. 
6 Building
the dictionaries and the 
database 
The results of our apl)roach is in prot)ortion the 
size of the database we use. We show that us
ing variables in FSTs, and the bootstrapping 
method, this constraint is not as huge it seems. 
One can start with a minimal database and im
prove the database, when testing it on a new 
corpus. Suppose for example, that the database 
is empty (we only have general purpose dictio
naries). We ask the system to find all occur
rences of the word 'minister', the result has the 
following form of concordance: 
Th. Israeli foreign minimter, Shimon Perch, said %he intern 
the Rulsian foreign minlster, Andrei V. Kozyrgvj vas likliy 
Berlusconi as prime minilter, but ty issue ought to be the 
courl, am the Greek minigtor of culture, thought up the ide 
1217 
firi~ dopu~y priml mlnistor, Oleg $osko~eta; Molcov has pl 
On this small sample, we see that it is in
teresting to search the different occurrences of 
"(<A>+<N>) <minister>" and we obtain the 
list: prime, foreign, Greek, finance, trade, 
interior, Cambodian .... 
We separate automatically in this list, words 
with uppercase first letter and lowercase words. 
This provide a first draft for a Nationality dic
tionary (on a 1Mo corpus, we obtain 234 entries 
(only with this simple rule). The list is then 
manually checked to extract noise as 'Trade 
minister of ...'. We then sort the lowercase 
adjective and begin to construct the minister 
graph. We find directly 23 words in the sub
graph "SpecialityMinisterLeft", plus the special 
compounds "prime minister" and %hief nfin
ister'. We then apply this graph to the cor
pus and attempt to extend occurrences to the 
left and to the right. We notice that we can 
find a name of country with an "'s"just to 
the left of the occupation, and thus we catch 
potential names of country with the following 
request: "\[A-Z\]\[a-z\]*'s :MinisterOccupation", 
where \[A-Z\] \[a-z\] * is any word beginning with 
an uppercase letter. This is an example of vari
able in the automaton. Pursuing this text-based 
method and starting from scratch, in roughly 
10 minutes, we build a first version of the dic
tionaries: Country (87 entries) and Nationality 
(255 entries), Firstname (50 entries), Surname 
(47 entries), plus a first version of the Minis
terOccupation and the FullName FSTs... The 
graphical tools and the real-time parsing algo
rithms we use are crucial in this construction. 
Remark that the strict domain of proper noun 
cannot be bounded: when we describe occupa
tions in companies, we must catch the company 
names. When we describe the medical occupa
tion, we are lead to catch the hospital names... 
Very quickly the coverage of the database en
larges, and dictionaries of names of companies, 
of towns must be constructed. Concerning the 
French, in a newspaper corpus, one word out of 
twenty is included in a occupation sequence: i.e. 
one sentence out of two in our corpus contained 
such noun phrase. 
7 Conclusion

In conclusion, we have developed this system 
first for the l~'ench language, with very good 
results. It partially solves the problem of 
Information Retrieval for this precise domain. 
In fact the "occupation" domain is not closed: 
is a "thief" an occupation ? To avoid such 
difficulties, and in order to reach a good 
coverage of the domain, we have described 
essentially institutional occupations. We know 
full well that if we want to be precise, a very 
deep semantic description should be done: 
for example, it is not sure that we can say a 
"prime minister" of France is comparable with 
a "prime minister" of UK ? One of strength 
of the described system is that it enables us 
to gather information present in different loca
tions of the corpus, which improves punctual 
descril)tions. Another interest of having such 
representations for different languages is a 
possibly automatic translation for such noun 
phrases. The output of the source language 
will be used in the target language of FSTs to 
identify paths having the same output, hence 
the same meaning. We are working to adapt 
the representation to other languages, such as 
English and the challenge is not only to repeat 
the same work on another language, but to keep 
the same outl)ut for two synonyms in French 
and English, which is not easy, because some 
occupations are totally specific to a language. 
Our method is totally text-based, and the ap
propriate tools allow us to enrich the database 
progressively. We strongly believe that the 
complete description of such noun phrases is 
needed (for all needs: IR, translation, syntactic 
analysis...), and our interactive method which 
is quite efficient to this aim. 

References 

M. Gross and J. Senellart. 1998. Nouvclles 
bases pour une approche statistique. In 
JADT98, Nice, France. 

E. Roche and Y. Schabcs, eds. 1997. Finite 
state language processing. MIT Press. 

Jean Senellart. 1998. Fast pattern matching in 
indexed texts. Being published in TCS. 

M. Silberztein. 1993. Dictionnaires 
dlectroniques et analyse automatique de 
textes. Masson. 

Zipf. 1932. Selected Studies of the Principle 
of Relative Frequencies in Language. Cam
bridge. 

