Trigger-Pair Predictors in Parsing and Tagging 
Ezra Black, Andrew Finch, Hideki Kashioka 
ATR Interpreting Telecommunications 
Laboratories 
2-2 Hikaridai, Seika-cho 
Soraku-gun, Kyoto, Japan 619-02 
{black,finch ,kashioka}~atr. itl. co. jp 
Abstract 
In this article, we apply to natural language 
parsing and tagging the device of trigger
pair predictors, previously employed exclu
sively within the field of language mod
elling for speech recognition. Given the 
task of predicting the correct rule to as
sociate with a parse-tree node, or the cor
recl lag to associate with a word of text, 
and assuming a particular class of pars
ing or tagging model, we quantify the in
formation gain realized by taking account 
of rule or tag trigger-pair predictors, i.e. 
pairs consisting of a "triggering' rule or 
tag which has already occurred in the docu
ment being processed, together with a spe
cific "triggered" rule or tag whose proba
bility of occurrence within the current sen
tence we wish to estimate. This informa
tion gain is shown to be subslantial. Fur
ther, by utilizing trigger pairs taken from 
the same general sort of doculnent as is be
ing processed (e.g. same subject matter or 
same discourse type) as opposed to pre
dictors derived from a comprehensive gen
eral set of English texts we can signifi
cantly increase this information gain. 
1 Introduction

If a person or device wished to predict which words 
or grammatical constructions were about to occur in 
some document, intuitively one of the most helpful 
things to know would seem to be which words and 
constructions occurred within the last half-dozen or 
dozen sentences of the document. Other things be
ing equal, a text that has so far been larded with, 
say, mountaineering terms, is a good bet to continue 
featuring them. An author with the habit of ending 
sentences with adverbial clauses of confirmation, e.g. 
"as we all know", will probably keep up that habit 
as the discourse progresses. 
Within the field of language modelling for speech 
recognition, maintaining a cache of words that have 
occurred so far within a document, and using this 
information to alter probabilities of occurrence of 
particular choices for the word being predicted, has 
proved a winning strategy (Kuhn et al., 1990). Mod
els using trigger pairs of words, i.e. pairs consist
ing of a "triggering" word which has already oc
curred in the document being processed, plus a spe
cific "triggered" word whose probability of occur
rence as the next word of the document needs to 
be estimated, have yielded perplexity 1 reductions 
of 29 38% over the baseline trigram model, for a 
5 million-word Wall Street Journal training corpus 
(Rosenfeld, 1996). 
This paper introduces the idea of using trigger 
pair techniques to ~ssist in the prediction of rule 
and tag occurrences, within the context of natural 
language parsing and tagging. Given the task of 
predicting the correct rule to associate with a parse
tree node, or the correct tag to associate with a word 
of text, and assuming a particular class of parsing 
or tagging model, we quantify the intbrmation gain 
realized by taking account of rule or tag trigger-pair 
predictors, i.e. pairs consisting of a "triggeriilg" rule 
or tag which has already occurred in the document 
being processed, plus a specific "triggered" rule or 
tag whose probability of occurrence within the cur
rent sentence we wish to estimate. 
In what follows, Section 2 provides a basic 
overview of trigger-pair models. Section 3 de
scribes the experiments we have performed, which 
to a large extent parallel successflfl modelling ex
periments within the field of language modelling for 
speech recognition. In the first experiment, we inves
tigate the use of trigger pairs to predict both rules 
and tags over our full corpus of around a million 
words. The subsequent experiments investigate the 
1See Section 2. 
131 
additional information gains accruing from trigger
pair modelling when we know what sort of document 
is being parsed or tagged. We present our exper
imental results in Section 4, and discuss them in 
Section 5. In Section 6, we present some example 
trigger pairs; and we conclude, with a glance at pro
jected future research, in Section 7. 
2 Background

Trigger-pair modelling research has been pursued 
within the field of language modelling for speech 
recognition over the last decade (Beeferman et ah, 
1997; Della Pietra et al., 1992; Kupiec, 1989; Lau, 
1994; Lau et ah, 1993; Rosenfeld, 1996). 
Fundamentally, the idea is a simple one: if you 
have recently seen a word in a document, then it is 
more likely to occur again, or, more generally, the 
prior occurrence of a word in a document affects the 
probability of occurrence of itself and other words. 
More formally, from an information-theoretic 
viewpoint, we can interpret the process as the rela
tionship between two dependent random variables. 
Let the outcome (from the alphabet of outcomes 
My) of a random variable Y be observed and used 
to predict a random variable X (with alphabet Ax). 
The probability distribution of X, in our case, is de
pendent on the outcome of Y. 
The average amount of information necessary to 
specify an outcome of X (measured in bits) is called 
its entrop.y H(X) and can also be viewed as a mea
sure of the average ambiguity of its outcomefl 
H(x) = (i) 
X~Ax 
The mutual information between X and Y is a 
measure of entropy (ambiguity) reduction of X from 
the observation of the outcome of Y. This is the 
entropy of X minus its a posteriori entropy, having 
observed the outcome of Y. 
r(x; Y) = H(x) H(xlv) 
= Z p(x, y) y) (2) • -e-4x yc.a~ P(x)P(y) 
The dependency information between a word and 
its history may be captured by the triwer pair. a 
A trigger pair is an ordered pair of words t and 
w. Knowledge that the trigger word t has occurred 
within some window of words in the history, changes 
2A more intuitive view of entropy is provided through 
perplexity (Jelinek et al., 1977) which is a measure of the 
number of choices, on average, there are for a random 
variable. It is defined to be: 2 H(x). 
aFor a thorough description of trigger-based mod
elling, see (Rosenfeld, 199(5). 
the probability estimate that word w will occur sub
sequently. 
Selection of these triggers can be performed by 
calculating the average mutual information between 
word pairs over a training corpus. In this case, the 
alphabet Ax = {w,@}, the presence or absence of 
word w; similarly, My = {t,t}, the presence or ab
sence of the triggering word in the history. 
This is a measure of the effect that the knowl
edge of the occurrence of the triggering word t has 
on the occurence of word w, in terms of the entropy 
(and therefore perplexity) reduction it will provide. 
Clearly, in the absence of other context (i.e. in the 
case of the a priori distribition of X), this infor
mation will be additional. However, once ~:elated 
contextual information is included (for example by 
building a trigram model, or, using other triggers for 
the same word), this is no longer strictly true. 
Once the trigger pairs are chosen, they may be 
used to form constraint functions to be used in 
a maximum-entropy model, alongside other con
straints. Models of this form are extremely versa
tile, allowing the combination of shortand long 
range information. To construct such a model, one 
transforms the trigger pairs into constraint f~lnctions 
f(t, w): 
I ift E history and 
f(t, w) = next word = ,v (3) 
0 otherwise 
The expected values of these flmctions are then 
used to constrain the model, usually in combination 
of with other constraints such as sinfilar functions 
embodying nni-, bi and trigram probability esti
mates. 
(Beeferman et ah, 1997) models more accurately 
the effect of distance between triggering and trig
gered word, showing that for non-self-triggers, 4 the 
triggering effect decays exponentially with distance. 
For self-triggers, 5 the effect is the same except that 
the triggering effect is lessened within a short range 
of the word. Using a model of these distance effects, 
they are able to improve the performance of a trigger 
model. 
We are unaware of any work on the use of trigger 
pairs in parsing or tagging. In fact, we have not 
found any previous research in which extrasentential 
data of any sort are applied to the problem of parsing 
or tagging. 
3 The
Experiments 
3.1 Experimental
Design 
In order to investigate the utility of using long 
range trigger information in tagging and parsing 
4i.e. words which trigger words other than themselves 
5i.e. words which trigger themselves 
132 
tasks, we adopt the simple mutual information ap
proach used in (Rosenfeld, 1996). We carry over 
into the domain of tags and rules an experiment from 
Rosenfeld's paper tile details of which we outline be
low. 
The idea is to measure the information con
tributed (in })its, or, equivalently in terms of per
t/lexity reduction) by using the triggers. Using this 
technique requires special care to ensure that infor
mation "added" by the triggers is indeed additional 
information. 
For this reason, in all our experiments we use the 
unigram model as our base model and we allow only 
one trigger for each tag (or rule) tokenf We derive 
these unigram probabilities from the training cor
pus and then calculate the total mutual information 
gained by using the trigger pairs, again with respect 
to the training corpus. 
When using trigger pairs, one usually restricts the 
trigger to occur within a certain window defined by 
its distance to tile triggered token. In our experi
ments, the window starts al the sentence prior to 
that containing the token and extends back W (the 
window size) sentences. The choice to use sentences 
as the unit of distance is motivated by our intention 
to incorporale triggers of this form into a probabilis
tie treebank based parser and tagger, sneh as (Black 
et al., 1998; Black et al., 1997; Brill, 1994; Collins, 
1996: aelinek et al., 1994; Magerman, 1995; blatna
parkhi, 1997). All su<'h parsers and taggers of which 
we are aware use only intrasentential information in 
predicting parses or tags, and we wish to remove 
this information, as far as possible, from our results 
'; The window was not allowed to cross a docu
ment b(mndary. The perplexity of lhe task before 
taking the trigger-pair information into account for 
tags was 224.0 and for rules was 57.0. 
The characteristics of the training corpus we em
ploy ar{~ given in Table 1. The corpus, a subset s 
of the ATl{\]Lancaster (~eneralEnglish Treebank 
(Black et al., 1996), consists of a sequence of sen
tences which have been tagged and parsed by hu
man experts in terms of the ATR English Gram
mar, a broad coverage granmtar of English with a 
high level of analytic detail (Black et al., 1996; Black 
et al., 1997). For instance, the tagset is both seman
SBy rule assignment, we mean the task of assigning 
a rulename to a node in a parse tree, given that the 
constituent boundaries have already been detined. 
rThis is not completely possible, since correlations, 
even if slight, will exist between intra and extrasenten
tial information 
~specifiealty, a roughly 900,000-word subset of tile 
Nll ATR/Lancaster General-English Treebank (about 
1.05 million words), from which all 150,000 words were 
excluded that were treebanked by the two least accurate 
ATR/Lanc'aster treebankers (expected hand parsing er
ror rate 32%, versus less than 10% overall for the three 
remaining treebankers) 
1868 documents 
80299 sentences 
904431 words (tag instances) 
1622664 constituents (rule instances) 
1873 tags utilized 
907 rules utilized 
tl.3 words per sentence, on average 
Table 1: Characteristics of Training Set (Subset of 
ATR/Laneaster General-English Treebank) 
tic and syntactic, and includes around 2000 different 
tags, which classify nouns, verbs, adjectives and ad
verbs via over 100 semantic categories. As examples 
of the level of syntactic detail, exhaustive syntactic 
and semantic analysis is performed on all nominal 
compounds; and tile htll range of attachme.nt sites 
is available within the Grammar for sentential and 
phrasal modifiers, and are used precisely in the Tree
bank. The Treebank actually consists of a set of doc
uments, from a variety of sources. Crucially for our 
experiments (see below), the idea 9 informing the se
lection of (the roughly 2000) docnments for inclusion 
in the Treebank was to pack into it the lllaxiulnnl 
degree of document variation along many difDrent 
scales-document length, subject area, style, point 
of view, etc.-but without establishing a single, pre 
determined classification of tile included documents. 
In tile first experiment, we examine the effective 
ness of using trigger pairs over tile entire training 
corpus. At the same time we investigate the ef
fect of varying the window size. In additional ex
periments: we observe the effect of partitioning our 
training dataset into a few relatively homogeneous 
subsets, on the hypothe'sis that this will decrease 
perplexity. It seems reasonable that in different text 
varieties, different sets of trigger pairs will be useful, 
and that tokens which do not have effective triggers 
within one text variety may have them in another. 1° 
To investigate the utility of partitioning the 
dataset, we construct a separate set of trigger pairs 
for each class. These triggers are only active for their 
respective class and are independent of each other. 
Their total nmtual information is compared to that 
derived in exactly the same way from a random par
tition of our corpus into the same nunlber of classes, 
each comprised of the same number of documents. 
Our training data partitions naturally into four 
subsets, shown in Table 2 as Partitioning 1 
("Source"). Partitioning 2, "List Structure", puts 
all documents which contain at least some IITML 
like "lAst" markup (e.g. LI (=List Item)) \]~ in one 
~see (Black et al., 1996) 
1°Related work in topic-specific trigram modelling 
(Lau, 1994) has led to a reduction in perplexity. 
llAll documents in our training set are marked up in 
IITML like annotation. 
133 
0.35 , 
tags -
rules 
subset, and all other documents in the other sub
set. By merging Partitionings 1 and 2 we obtain 
Partitioning 3, "Source Plus List Structure". Parti
tioning 4 is "Source Plus Document Type", and con
tains 9 subsets, e.g. "Letters; diaries" (subset 8) and 
"Novels; stories; fables" (subset 7). With 13 subsets, 
Partitioning 5, "Source Plus Domain", includes e.g. 
"Social Sciences" (subset 9) and Recreation (subset 
1). Partitionings 4 and 5 were effected by actual 
inspection of each document, or at least of its title 
and/or summary, by one of the authors. The reason 
we included Source within most partitionings was 
to determine the extent to which information gains 
were additive. 12 
4 Experimental
Results 
4.1 Window
Size 
Figure 1 shows the effect of varying the window 
size from 1 to 500 for both rule and tag tokens. The 
optimal window size for tags was approximately 12 
sentences (about 135 words) and for rules it was ap
proximately 6 sentences (about 68 words). These 
values were used for all subsequent experiments. It 
is interesting to note that the curves are of sinai
lar shape for both rules and tags and that the op
timal value is not the largest window size. Related 
effects for words are reported in (Lau, 1994; Beefer
man et al., 1997). In the latter paper, an exponential 
model of distance is used to penalize large distances 
between triggering word and triggered word. The 
variable window used here can be seen as a simple 
alternative to this. 
One explanation for this effect in our data is, in 
the case of tags, that topic changes occur in docu
ments. In the case of rules, tile effect would seem 
to indicate a short span of relatively intense stylistic 
carryover in text. For instance, it may be much more 
important, in predicting rules typical of list struc
ture, to know that similar rules occurred a few sen
tences ago, than to know that they occurred dozens 
of sentences back in the document. 
4.2 Class-Speelfic Triggers 
Table 3 shows the improvement in perplexity over 
the base (unigram) tag and rule models for both the 
randomly-split and the hand--partitioned training 
sets. In every case, the meaningful split yielded sig
nificantly more information than the random split. 
(Of course, the results for randomly-split training 
sets are roughly the same as for the unpartitioned 
training set (Figure 1)). 
12For instance, compare the results for Partitionings 
1, 2, and 3 in this regard. 
55 
2 
0.3 f'N......_...._~_ 
0.25 
0.2 
0.15 
0.1 '"'"" ........................................................................... 
0.05 , , , , , , L ~ , __ 
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 
Window size (sentences) 
Figure 1: Mutual information gain varying window 
size 
5 Discussion

The main result of this paper is to show that 
analogous to the case of words in language mod
elling, a significant amount of extrasentential infor
mation can be extracted from the long-range his
tory of a document, using trigger pairs for tags and 
rules. Although some redundancy of information is 
inevitable, we have taken care to exclude as much 
information as possible that is already available to 
(intrasentential-data-based, i.e. all known) parsers 
and taggers. 
Quantitatively, the studies of (Rosenfeld, 1996) 
yielded a total mutual information gain of 0.38 bits, 
using Wall Street Journal data, with one trigger per 
word. In a parallel experiment, using the same tech
nique, but on the ATR/Lancaster corpus, the total 
nmtual information of the triggers for tags was 0.41 
bits. This figure increases to 0.52 bits when tags fur
ther away" than 135 tags (the approximate equivalent 
in words to the optimal window size in sentences) are 
excluded from the history. For the remainder of our 
experiments, we do not use as part of the history 
the tags/rules from the sentence containing the to
ken to be predicted. This is motivated by our wish 
to exclude the intrasentential information which is 
already available to parsers and taggers. 
In the case of tags, using the optimal window size, 
the gain was 0.31 bits, and for rules the information 
gain was 0.12 bits. Although these figures are not 
as large as for the case where intrasentential infor
mation is incorporated, they are sufficiently close to 
encourage us to exploit this information in our mod
els. 
For the case of words, the evidence shows that 
triggers derived in the same manner as the trig
gers in our experiments, can provide a substantial 
amount of new information when used in combina
tion with sophisticated language models. For ex
ample, (Rosenfeld, 1996) used a maximum entropy 
134 
Part. 1: Source 
(?lass Nalne Sents 
1: Assoc. Press, WSJ 8851 
2: Canadian Itansards 5002 
3: General English 23105 ,1:Traw;1 domain dialgs 43341 
Part. 2: List Structure 
Class Name Sents 
1: Contains lists 14147 
2: ('.ontains no lists 66152 
Part. 3: Source + List Structure 
Class Name Sents 
1: Assoc. Press, WSJ 8851 
2: Canadian tlansards 5002 
3: Contains lists (Gem) 11998 
4: Contains no lists (Gen.) 11117 
5: Travel domain dialogues 43341 
Part. 4: Source + Doc Type Part. 5: Source + Domain 
Class Name Sents Class Name Sents 
1: Legislative 5626 1: Recreation 3545 
(incl. Srce.2) 2: Business 2055 
2: Transcripts 44287 3: Science, Teehn. 4018 
(incl. Srce.4) 4: Humanities 2224 
3: News 8614 5: Daily Living 896 
(incl. most Srce.1) 6: Health, Education 1649 
4: Polemical essays 5160 7: Government, Polit. 1768 
5: Reports; FAQs; 11440 8: Travel 2667 
listings 9: Social Sciences 3617 
6: Idiom examples 666 10: Idiom examp, sents 666 
7: Novels; stories; 741 11: Canadian ftansards 5002 
fables 12: Assoc. Press, WSJ 8851 
8: Letters; diaries 1997 13: Travel dialgs 43341 
9: Legal cases; 1768 
constitutions 
Table 2: Training Set Partitions 
Partitioning I)erplexity reduction for rules 
\]: ,b'OUFCe 
2: List Slruclure 
3: Source Plus List Structure 
d: fiource Plus DocumeTd "lype 
5: Source Plus Domain 
Meaningful partition 
28.40% 
20.39% 
28.74% 
30.11% 
31.55% 
Perplexity reduction for tags 
Random 
16.66% 
18.71% 
17.12% 
18.15% 
19.39% 
Meaningful partition 
15.44% 
10.55% 
15.61% 
16.20% 
16.60% 
Random 
(5.30% 
7.46% 
6.50% 
6.82% 
7.34% 
Table 3: Perplexity reduction using class-specific triggers to predict tags and rules 
Triggering Tag Triggered Tag I.e. Words Like These: Trigger Words Like These: # 
1 NP1LOCNM

2 JJSYSTEM

3 IIDESIqTE

4 PN
1Pti:RSON 
5 .,. 
6 IIAT(SF) 
7 IIFtlOM(SF) 
8 NNUNUM

NP1STATENM 
NP1Ot{G 
CFYET 
LEBUT22 
MPt{ICE 
MPHONE22 
MZ1P 
NN1MONEY 
Hill, County, Bay, Lake 
national, federal, political 
despite 
everyone, one, anybody 
at. (sent.-tinal, +/-":") 
from (sent. final, +/-":") 
25%, 12", 9.4m3 
Utah, Maine, Alaska 
Party', Council, Department 
yet (conjunction) 
(not) only, (not)just 
$452,983,000, 810,000, $19.95 
913-3434 (follows area code) 
22314-1698 (postal zipcode) 
profit, price, cost 
Table 4: Selected Tag Trigger-Pairs, ATR/Lancaster General-English Treebank 
# 
la 
11) 
2a 
21:) 
3a 
3b 
4a 
41) 
5a 
5b 
A ('onslruction lake This: 
Interrupter Phrase --> * Or 
Example: *, 
VP 2> Verb+Interrupter Phrase+Obj/Compl 
Triggers A Construction Like This: 
Sentence -> Interrupter P+Phrasal (Non S) 
Example: * DIG. AM/FM TUNER 
Interrupter Phrase > ,+Interrupter+, 
Example: , according to participants , Example: starring surprise, surprise--men 
Noun Phrase > Simple Noun Phrase+Nurn Num -> Num +PrepP with Numerical Obj 
Example: Lows around 50 Example: (Snow level) 6000 to 7000 
Verb Phrase -> Adverb Phrase+Verb Phrase Auxiliary VP -> Model/Auxilliary Verb+Not 
Example: just need to understand it Example: do not 
Question -> Be+NP+Object/Complement Quoted Phrasal -> "+Phrasal Constit+" 
Example: Is it possible? Example: "Mutual funds are back." 
Table 5: Selected Rule Trigger-Pairs, ATR/Lancaster General-English Treebank 
135 
://: Triggering Tag Triggered Tag 
1 VVNSEND
NP1STATENM 
2 NP1LOCNM
NP1STATENM 
For training-set document class Recreation (1) 
I.e. Words Like These: Trigger Words Like These: 
shipped, distributed Utah, Maine, Alaska 
Hill, County, Bay, Lake Utah, Maine, Alaska 
vs. for unpartitioned training set (2) 
3 VVOALTER

4 JJPHYS-ATT 
For training-set document 
NN2SUBSTANCE inhibit, affect, modify tumors, drugs, agents 
NN2SUBSTANCE fragile, brown, choppy pines, apples, chemicals 
class Health And Education (3) vs. for unpartitioned training set (~) 
5 NN1TIME

6 NP1POSTFRMNM

For training-set document 
NN2MONEY period, fllture, decade expenses, fees, taxes 
NN2MONEY Inc., Associates, Co. loans, damages, charges 
class Business (5) vs. for unpartitioned training set (6) 
7 DD1
I 8 DDQ 
For training-set document 
DDQ this, that, another, each which 
DDQ which which 
class 7}'avel Dialogues (7) vs. for unpartilioned training set (8) 
Table 6: Selected Tag Trigger-Pairs, ATR/Lancaster General-English Treebank: Contrasting Trigger -Pairs 
Arising From Partitioned vs. Unpartitioned Training Sets 
model trained on 5 million words, with only trigger, 
uni-, hiand trigram constraints, to measure the 
test-set perpexity reduction with respect to a "com
pact" backoff trigram model, a well-respected model 
in the language-modelling field. When the top six 
triggers for each word were used, test set perplex
ity was reduced by 25%. Furthermore, when a more 
sophisticated version of this model 13 was applied in 
conjunction with the SPHINX II speech recognition 
system (ttuang et al., 1993), a 10-14% reduction in 
word error rate resulted (Rosenfeld, 1996). We see 
no reason why this effect should not carry over to tag 
and rule tokens, and are optimistic that long-range 
trigger information can be used in both parsing and 
tagging to improve performance. 
For words (Rosenfeld, 1996), self-trigger~words 
which triggered themselves--were the most frequent 
kind of triggers (68% of all word triggers were sell 
triggers). This is also the case for tags and rules. For 
tags, 76.8% were self-triggers, and for rules, 96.5% 
were self-triggers. As in the case of words, the set 
of self-triggers provides the most useflfl predictive 
information. 
6 Some
Examples 
\~% will now explicate a few of the example trig
ger pairs in Tables 4-6. Table 4 Item 5, for instance, 
captures the common practice of using a sequence of 
points, e.g ........... , to separate each item of a (price) 
list and the price of that item. Items 6 and 7 are 
similar cases (e.g. "contact/call (someone) at:" + 
phone number; "available from:" + source, typically 
including address, hence zipcode). These correla
tions typically occur within listings, and, crucially 
13trained on 38 million words, and also employing 
distance-2 N-gram constraints, a unigram cache and a 
conditional bigram cache (this model reduced perplexity 
over the baseline trigram model by 32%) 
for their usefulness as triggers, typically occur many 
at a time. 
When triggers are drawn from a relatively homo
geneous set of documents, correlations emerge which 
seem to reflect the character of the text type in
volved. So in Table 6 Item 5, the proverbial equa
tion of time and money emerges as more central to 
Business and Commerce texts than the different but 
equally sensible linkup, within our overall training 
set, between business corporations and money. 
Turning to rule triggers, Table 5 Item 1 is more 
or less a syntactic analog of the tag examples Ta
ble 4 Items 5 7, just discussed. What seems to be 
captured is that a particular style of listing things, 
e.g. * -/listed item, characterizes a document as a 
whole (if it contains lists); further, listed items are 
not always of the same phrasal type, but are prone 
to vary syntactically. The same document that con
tains the list item "* DIG. AM/FM TUNER", for 
instance, which is based on a Noun Phrase, soon af
terwards includes "* WEATHER PROOF" and "* 
ULTRA COMPACT", which are based on Adjective 
Phrases. 
Finally, as in the case of the tag trigger examples 
of Table 6, text-type particular correlations emerge 
when rule triggers are drawn from a relatively ho
mogeneous set of documents. A trigger pair of con
structions specific to Class 1 of tile Source partition
ing, which contains only Associated Press ncwswire 
and Wall Street Journal articles, is the following: A 
sentence containing both a quoted remark and an 
attribution of that remark to a particular source, 
triggers a sentence containing simply a quoted re
mark, without attribution. (E.g. "The King was i7~ 
trouble," Wall wrote, triggers "This inereased the 
King's bitterness.".) This correlation is essentially 
absent in other text types. 
136 
7 Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown that, as in the case of 
words, there is a substantial amonnt of information 
outside the sentence which could be used to sup
plement tagging and parsing models. We have also 
shown that knowledge of tim type of document being 
processed greatly increases the usefulness of triggers. 
If this information is known, or can be predicted ac
curately fl:om the history of a given document being 
processed, then model interpolation techniques (ae
line.k et al., 1980) could be employed, we anticipate, 
1o exploit this to useflll effect. 
Future research will concentrate on incorporating 
trigger pair information, and extrasentential infor
mation more generally, into more sophisticated mod
els of parsing and tagging. An obvious first extention 
to this work. for the case of tags, will be, following 
(l~osenfehl, 1996), to incorporate tit(', triggers into a 
maxinmm entropy model using trigger pairs in ad
dition to unigram, bigram and trigram constraints. 
1,atcr we inlend to ineort)orate trigger informatiou 
into a probabilistic English parser/tagger which is 
able to ask complex, detailed questions about the 
contents of a sentence. From the results presented 
here we are oi>timistic that the additional, extrasen
tential information provided by trigger pairs will 
benefit such parsing and lagging systems. 

References 

1). l~eeferman, A. Berger, and a. Lafferty. 1997. A Model of l,exical Attraction and Repulsion. In Proeeedi~)gs of the ACL-EACL'97 Joir~l Confere~ce. Madrid. 

E. Black, S. l';ubank, H. Kashioka, J. Saia. 1998. Heinventing Part-of-Speech Tagging. Journal of .Vatural Lar~g'uage Processing (Japan), 5:1. 

E. Black. S. Eubank, H. Kashioka. 1997. l'robabilistie l)arsing of Unrestricted I'nglish Text, With A Iiighly-l)etailed Grammar. In ProceediT~gs, Fifth WorL'shop on Very Large Corpora, Beijing/Ilong Kong. 

FL Black, S. l';ubank, H. Kashioka, R. Garside, G. Leech, and I). Magerman. 1996. Beyond skeleton parsing: producing a comprehensive large-scale general English treebank with lull grammatical analysis. In Proceedings of the 15th Anrtual Con-j'cre~cc on ComputatioT~al LiT~guislics, pages 107 112, Copenhagen. 

J. Brill. 1994. Some Advances in Transformation Based Part of Sl)eech Tagging. In Proceedings of the Twelfth National Conference on Artificial lt~lelligence, pages 722-727, Seattle, Washington. A,nerican Association for Artificial Intelligence. 

M. Collins. 11996. A new statistical parser based on bigram lexieal dependencies, in Proceedings of the 34th Annual Meeting of the AssoeiatioTt for Computational Languistics, Santa Cruz. 

S. Della Pietra, V. Della Pietra, R. Mercer, S. Roukos. 1992. Adaptive language modeling using minimum discriminant information. Proceedings of the International CoT~ferer~ce on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, I:633 636. 

X. IIuang, F. Alleva, II.-W. lion, M. Y. tlwang, K. F. Lee, and R. Rosenfeld. 1993. The SPHINX II speech recognition system: an overview. Computer Speech and Language, 2:137 148. 

F. Jelinek, R. L. Mercer, L. R. Bahl, 3. K. Baker. 1977. Perplexity-a measure of difficulty of speech recognition tasks. In Proceedings of the 94th Meeting of the Acoustic 5'ociety of America, Miami Beach, FL. 

t >. Jelinek and R. Mercer. 1980. lnterpola(ed eslimation of Markov source parameters from sparse data. In Pattern Recogl)itiol) In Practice, \[';. S. Gelsema and N. 1,. Kanal, eds., l)ages 381 402, Amsterdam: North IIolland. 

F. Jelinek, J. Lafferty, D. Magerman, H. Mercer, A. Ratnaparkhi, S. Roukos. 1994. Decision tree parsing using a hidden derivation model. In Proceedings of the ARPA Workshop on tluma~ Lar)guagc Techr~ology, pages 260 265, Plainsboro, New Jersey. Advanced Research Projects Agency. 

R. Kuhn, R. De Mort. 1990. A Cache Bas('d Natural Language Model for Speech Recognition. IEEE 7}'ar~sactiol)s on PalterT~ ATtalysis al~d Machine Intelligence, 12(6):570 asa. 

a. Kupiec. 1989. Probabilistic models of short and long distance word dependencies in running text. In Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop o7~ Speech and Natural Language, pages 290 295. 

R. Lau, R. Rosenfeld, S. Roukos. 1993. Trigger-based language models: a maximum entropy approach. Proceedings of the h)lernatior~ul CoT,fer-e~ce on Acoustics, Speech and Sig~al Processi~lg, lI:45-48. 

t{. Lau. 1994. Adaptive Statistical Language Modelling. Master's Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, MA. 

D. Magerman. 1995. Statistical decision tree models for parsing. In 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for' Computational Lir~guistics, pages 276-283, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

A. Ratnaparkhi. 1997. A Linear Observed Time Statistical Parser Based on Maximum I'hltropy Models. In Proceedings, Second Conference or) Empirical Methods in Natural Lar~guage Processing, Providence, RI. 

R. Rosenfeld. 1996. A maxinmm entropy approach to adaptive statistical language modelling. Computer Speech and Language, 10:187 228.  

