An Estimate of Referent of Noun Phrases in Japanese Sentences 
Masaki Murata Makoto Nagao 
Communications Research Laboratory I{yoto University 
588-2, lwaoka, Nishi-ku, Kobe, 651-2401, Japan Yoshida-Honmachi, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-01, Japan 
Abstract 
In machine translation and man-machine dialogue, 
it is important to clarify' referents of noun phrases. 
We present a method for determining the referents 
of noun phrases in Japanese sentences by using the 
referential properties, modifiers, and possessors 1 of 
noun phrases. Since the Japanese language has 
no articles, it is difficult to decide whether a noun 
phrase has an antecedent or not. We had previously 
estimated the referential properties of noun phrases 
that correspond to articles by using clue words in 
the sentences (Murata and Nagao 1993). By using 
these referential properties, our system determined 
tile referents of noun phrases ill Japanese se,ltences. 
Furthermore we used the modifiers and possessors 
of noun phrases in determining the referents of noun 
phrases. As a result, on training sentences we ob
tained a precision rate of 82% and a recall rate of 
85% in the determination of the referents of noun 
phrases that have antecedents. On test sentences, 
we obtained a precision rate of 79% and a recall rate 
of 77%. 
1 Introduction

This paper describes the determinatiou of the ref
erent of a noun phrase in Japanese sentences. In 
machine translation, it is important to clarify the 
referents of noun phrases. For example, since the 
two "OJIISAN (old man)" in the following sentences 
have the salne referent, the second "OJIISAN (old 
man)" should be prononfinalized in the translation 
into English. 
OJIISAN-WA JIMEN-NI KOSHI-WO-OROSHITA. 
(old man) (ground) (sit down) 
(The old man sat down on the ground.) 
YAGATE OJIISAN-WA NEMUTTE-StHMATTA. 
(soon) (old man) (fall asleep) 
(He (= the old man) soon fell asleep.) 
(1) 
When dealing with a situation like this, it is neces
sary for a machine translation system to recognize 
that the two "OJIISAN (old man)" have the salne 
referent. In this paper, we propose a method that 
determines the referents of noun phrases by using 
(1) the referential properties of noun phrases, (2) the 
modifiers in noun phrases, and (3) the possessors of 
entities denoted by the noun phrases. 
1The possessor of a noun phrase is defined a.s the entity 
which is the owner of tile entity denoted by the noun phrase. 
For languages that have articles, like English, we 
can use articles ("the", "a", and so on) to decide 
whether a noun phrase has an antecedent or not. 
In contrast, for languages that have no articles, like 
Japanese, it is dimcult to decide whether a noun 
phrase has all autecedent. We previously estimated 
tile referential properties of noun phrases that cor
respond to articles for the translation of Japanese 
noun phrases into English (Murata and Nagao 1993). 
By using these referential properties, our system de
termines the referents of noun phr~es in Japanese 
sentences. Noun phrases are classified by referential 
property into generic noun phrases, definite noun 
phrases, and indefinite noun phrases. When tile ref
erential property of a noun phrase is a definite noun 
phrase, the noun phrase can refer to the entity de
noted by a noun phrase that has already appeared. 
When the referential property of a noun phrase is an 
indefinite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase, the 
uoun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted by a 
noun phrase that has already appeared. 
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun 
phrases using only the referential property. This is 
because even if the referential property of a noun 
phrase is a definite noun phrase, the noun phrase 
does not refer to tile entity denoted by a noun phrase 
which has a different modifier or possessor. There
fore, we also use the modifiers and possessors of noun 
ptm~ses in determining referents of noun phrases. 
In connection with our aI~proach, we would like to 
emphasize the following points: 
• So far little work has been done on determining 
the referents of noun phrases in Japanese. 
• Since the Japanese language has no articles, it is 
difl:icult to decide whether a norm phrase has an 
antecedent or not. We use referential properties 
to solve this problem. 
• We determine the possessors of entities denoted 
by noun phrases and use them like modifiers in 
estimating the referents of noun phrases. Since 
the method uses the sematic relation between 
all entity and the possessor, which is a language
independent knowledge, it can be used in any 
other language. 
2 Referential
Property of a Noun 
Phrase 
The following is an example of noun phrase 
anaphora. "OJIISAN (old man)" ill the tirst, sen
912 
tence arm "OJIISAN (old man)" in tile second sen
tence refer to the stone old Inan, and they are in 
anaphoric relation. 
OJIISAN TO OBAASAN-GASUNDEITA. 
(at, old man) (and) (an old woman) (lived) 
(There lived an old man and an old woman.) 
OJIISAN-WA YAMA-HE SHIBAKARI-NI ITTA. 
Indefinite noun I)hrase All indefinite noun 
phrase denotes an arbitrary member of the class of 
the noun phrase. For example, "INU(dog)" in the 
following sentence is an indefinite noun phrase. 
INU-GA SANBIKI IRU. 
(dog) (three) (there is) 
(There are three dogs.) 
(old man) (mountain) (to gather firewood) (go) All indefinite noun phrase cannot refer to the entity 
(The old man went to the mountains to gather firewood.) denoted by a 11oilu plu'ase that has already appeared. 
(2) 
When the system analyzes the anaphoric relation 
of noun phrases like these, the referential proper
ties of noun phrases are important. The referential 
property of a noun phrase here means how tile noun 
phrase denotes the referent. If the system can rec
ognize that the second "OJIISAN (old man)" has 
the referential property of the definite noun phrase, 
indicating that the noun phrase refers to the con
tc'xtually non-ambiguous entity, it will be able to 
judge that the second "OJIISAN (old man)" refers 
to the entity denoted by the first "OJIISAN (old 
man). The referential property plays an important 
role in clarifying the anat)horic relation. 
We previously classified noun phrases by rel'eren
tim property into the following three types (Murata 
and Nagao 1993). 
generi(: NI' { 
NP llOll generic NP definite NP indefinite N P 
Generi(" noun phrase A noun phrase is classiiied 
as generic when it denotes all members of the class 
described I)y the noun phrase or the class itself of 
the noun phrase. For example, "lNU(dog)" in the 
following sentence is a generic nOtlll phrase. 
\[NII-WA YAK UNI-TATSU. 
((tOg) (usefl,l) 
(Dogs are useful.) (a) 
A generic noun phrase cannot refer to the entity de
noted by an indefinite or definite noun phrase. Two 
generic noun phrases can have the same referent. 
Definite noun phrase A noun phrase is classi
fied as definite when it denotes a contextually non
ambiguous member of the class of the noun phrase. 
For example, "INU(dog)" in the following sentence 
is a definite noun phrase. 
INU-WA MUKOUHE I'I'TA. 
(clog) tawdry) (go) 
(The dog went away.) 
(4) 
A definite noun l)hrase can refer to the entity de
noted by a noun phrase that has already appeared. 
3 How
to Determine the Referent of 
a Noun Phrase 
To (let.ernline referents of noun phrases, we made the 
following three constraints. 
I. I{eferential property constraint 
2. Modifier constraint 
3. Possessor constraint 
When two no/in phrases which have the stone head 
noun satisfy these three constraints, the system 
judges that the two noun phrases have the same ret'~ 
erent. 
3.1 Refi.,rential Proi)erty Constraint 
First, our system estimates tile ret~rential property 
of a noun phrase by usiug the method described 
in one of our l)revious papers (Murata and Nagao 
1993). 'I'he method estimates a referential property 
using surface expressions in the sentences. For ex
ample, since the second "OJIISAN (old man)" in 
the tbllowing sentences is accompanied by a particle 
"WA (topic)" and the predicate is in tile past. tense, 
it is estimated to be a. definite noun phrase. 
OJIISAN-W:\ JIMEN-NI KOSIII-WO-OIIOSIIITA. 
(old man) (ground) (sit down) 
(The old man sat down on the ground.) 
YAC, ATE OJIISAN-WA NF;MUTTI';-SItIMAIMATTA. 
(soon) (old ,n;u,) (fall asleep) 
tile soon fall asleep.) 
Next, our system deternfines the refl.'rent of a 
noun phrase by using its estimated referential prop
erty. When a noun phrase is estimated to be a def
inite noun phrase, our system judges that the noun 
phrase refers t.o the entity denoted by a previous 
noun phrase which has the same head noun. For 
example, the second "OJIISAN" in the above sen
tences is estimated to be a definite Ilotln phrase, and 
our syst.em judges that it refers to tile entity denoted 
by the first "OJIISAN". 
When a noun phrase is not estimated to be a deft
nite noun phrase, it. usually does not re%r to the en
tity denoted by a noun phrase that has already been 
913 
mentioned. Our method, however, might fail to es
timate the referential property, so the noun phrase 
might refer to the entity denoted by a noun phrase 
that has already been mentioned. Therefore, when 
a noun phrase is not estimated to be a definite noun 
phrase, our system gets a possible referent of the 
noun phrase and determines whether or not the noun 
phrase refers to it by using the following three kinds 
of information. 
• the plausibility(P) of the estimated referential 
property that is a definite noun phrase 
When our system estimates a referential prop
erty, it outputs the score of each category (Mu
rata and Nagao 1993). The value of the plausi
bility (P) is given by the score. 
the weight (W) of the salience of a possible 
referent 
The weight (W) of the salience is given by the 
particles such ~s "WA (topic)" and "GA (sub
ject)". The entity denoted by a noun phrase 
which has a high salience, is easy to be referred 
by a noun phrase. 
the distance (D) between the estimated noun 
phrase and a possible referent 
The distance (D) is the number of noun phrases 
between the estimated noun phrase and a pos
sible referent. 
VChen the value given by these three kinds of infor
mation is higher than a given threshold, our system 
judges that the noun phrase refers to the possible 
referent. Otherwise, it judges that the noun phrase 
does not refer to the possible referent and is an in
definite noun phrase or a generic noun phrase. 
3.2 Modifier
Constraint 
It is insufficient to determine referents of noun 
phrases by using only the referential property. 
When two noun phrases have different modi
tiers, they usually do not have the same referent. 
For example, "MIGI(right)-NO HOO(cheek)" and 
"HIDARI(Ieft)-NO ttOO(cheek)" in the following 
sentences do not have the same referent. 
KONO OJIISAN-NO KOBU-WA MIGI-NO HOO-NI ATTA. 
(this) (old man) (lump) (right) (cheek) (be on) 
(This old man's lump was on his right cheek.) 
TENGU-WA, I,:OBU-WO HIDARI-NO HOO-NI TSUKETA. 
(tengu) ~ (lump) (left) (cheek) (put on) 
(The "tengu" put a lump on his left. cheek) (7) 
Therefore, we made the following constraint: A 
noun phrase that has a modifier cannot refer to the 
2A tengu is a kind of monster. 
entity denoted by a noun phrase that does not have 
the same modifier. A noun phrase that does not 
have a modifier can refer to the entity denoted by a 
noun phrase that has any modifier. 
The constraint is incomplete, and is not truly ap
plicable to all cases. There are some exceptions 
where a noun can refer to the entity of a noun that 
has a different modifier. But we use the constraint 
because we can get a higher precision than if we did 
not use it. 
3.3 Possessor
Constraint 
When a noun phrase has a semantic marker PAR (a 
part of a body), 3 our system tries to estimate the 
possessor of the entity denoted by the noun phrase. 
We suppose that the possessor of a noun phrase is 
the subject or the noun phrase's nearest topic that 
has a semantic marker HUM (human) or a seman
tic marker ANI (animal). For example, we examine 
two instances of "tIOO (cheek)" in the following sen
tences, which have a semantic marker PAR. 
OJIISAN-NIWA \[OJIISAN-NO\] 4 HIDARI-NO 
(old man) (old man's) (left) 
HOO-NI KOBU-GA ATTA. 
(cheek) (lump) (be on) 
(This old man had a lump on his left cheek.) 
SORE-WA KOBUSHI-HODO-NO I,:OBU-DATTA. 
(it) (person's fist) (lump) 
(It is about the size of a person's fist.) 
OJIISAN-GA \[OJIISAN-NO\] ttOO-WO 
(old man (subject)) (old man's) (cheek) 
ttUKURAMASETE IRUYOUNI-MIETA. 
(puff) (look as if) 
(tfe looked as if he had puffed out his cheek.) 
The possessor of the first "HOO (cheek)" is deter
mined to be "OJIISAN (old man)" because "OJI
ISAN (old man)", which has a semantic marker 
HUM (human), is followed by a particle "NIWA 
(topic)" and is the topic of the sentence. The posses
sor of the second "HOO (cheek)" is also determined 
to be "OJIISAN (old man)" because "OJIISAN (old 
man)" is the subject of the sentence. 
We made the following constraint, which is simi
lar to the modifier constraint, by using possessors. 
When the possessor of a noun phrase is estimated, 
the noun phrase cannot refer to the entity denoted 
by a noun phrase that does not have the same pos
sessor. When the possessor of a noun phrase is not 
estimated, the noun phrase can refer to the entity 
denoted by a noun phrase that has any possessor. 
3In this paper, we use tile Noun Semantic Marker Dictio
nary (Watanabe et a1.1992). 
4 The
words ill brackets \[ \] are omitted in the sentences. 
914 
For example, since the two instances of "IIO0 
(cheek)" in the above sentences have the same pos
sessor "OJIISAN (old man)", our system correctly 
judges that they have the same referent. 
4 Anaphora
Resolution System 
4.1 Procedure

Before referents are determined, sentences are trans
formed into a case structure by the c~e structure 
analyzer (Kurohashi and Nagao 1994). 
Referents of nolln phrases are determined by us
ing heuristic rules which are made from information 
such as tile three constraints mentioned in Section 3. 
Using these rules, our system takes possible referents 
and gives them points. It judges that the candidate 
having tile maximum total score is the referent. This 
is because a number of types of information are com
bined in anaphora resolution. We can specify which 
rule takes priority by using points. 
The heuristic rules are given in the following form. 
Condition -~{ I'roposal Proposal .. } 
Proposal := ( Possible-Referent Point ) 
llere, C'onditio, consists of surface expressions, se
mantic constraints and referential properties. In 
Possible-ReIbrent, a possible referent, "hldefinite", 
"Generic", or other things are written. "Indefinite" 
means that tile noun phase is an indefinite noun 
phrase, and it. does not reDr to the entity denoted by 
a previous noun phrase. Point means the plausibility 
wdue of tile possible referent.. 
4.2 Heuristic
Rule fi)r Estimating Referents 
We made. 8 heuristic rules for the resolution of noun 
phrase anaphora. Sorne of them are given below. 
l{1 When a noun phrase is modified by the words 
"SOREZORE-NO (each)" and "ONOONO-NO 
(each)", 
{(Indefinite, 25)} 
1{2 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a deft
nite noun phrase, and satisfies the modifier and 
possessor constraints, and the same noun phrase 
X has already appeared, 
{(The noun phrase X, 30)} 
I/3 When a noun phrase is estimated to be a generic 
nOtlll phrase, 
{(Generic, 10)} 
R4 When a noun phrase is estimated to be an in
definite noun phrase, 
{(Indefinite, 10)} 
1{5 When a noun phrase X is not estimated to be a 
definite noun phrase, 
{ (A noun phrase X which satisfies tile modifier 
and possessor constraints, P + WD + 4)} 
Tile values P, W, D are as defined in Section 
3.1. 
5 Experiment
and Discussion 
5.1 ExI)eriment 
Before det, ermining the referents of noun phrases, 
sentences were at first transformed into a case struc
ture by the case structure analyzer (Kurohashi and 
Nagao 1994). rl'he errors made by the case analyzer 
were corrected by hand. Table 1 shows the results 
of determining the referents o\[' noun phrases. 
'Po confirm that the three constraints (referential 
property, moditier, and possessor) are effective, we 
exl)erimented under several difl>rent conditions and 
compared them. The results are shown in Table 2. 
Precision is the fi'action of noun phrases which were 
judged to haw'. antecedents. Recall is the fraction of 
noun l)hrases which have antecedents. 
In these experiments we used training sentences 
and test sentences. The training sentences were used 
to make the heuristic rules in Section 4.2 by hand. 
The test sentences were used to confirm the effec
tiveness of these rules. 
In Table 2, Method 1 is the method mentioned in 
Section 3 which uses all three constraints. Method 2 
is the case m which a nonn phrase can refer to the 
entity denoted by a noun phrase, only when the esti
mated referential property is a definite noun phrase, 
where the modifier and possessor constraints are 
used. Method 3 does not use a referential prop
erty. It only uses inR)rmation such as distance, topic
focus, modifier, and possessor. Method ,t does not 
use the modifier and possessor constraints. 
q'he table shows many results, in Method 1, both 
the recall and the precision were relatively high in 
comparison with the. other methods. This indicates 
that the referential I)roperty was used properly in the 
method that is described in this paper. Method 1 
was higher than Method 3 in both recall and In'e
cision. This indicates that the information of ref'or
ential property is necessary. In Method 2, the re
call was low because there were many noun phrases 
that were definite but were estimated t.o \[)e indefinite 
or generic, and the systern estinlated that the notln 
phra.ses cannot relier to noutl phrases. In Method 4, 
the precision was low. Since tile modifier and pos
sessor constraints were not used, and there were 
many pairs of two noun phrases that did not co
refer, such as "IIIDARI(Ieft)-NO llOO(cheek)" and 
"MIGI(right)-NO IIOO(cheek)", these pairs were in
correctly interpreted to be co-references. This indi
cates that it is necessary to use the modifier and 
possessor constraints. 
5.2 gxalnples of Errors 
We found that it was necessary to use modifiers alld 
possessors ill the experiments. But there are some 
cases when the referent was determined incorrectly 
because the 1)ossessor of a noun was estimated in
correctly. 
915 
Table 1: Results 
Precision 
Training sentences 82% (130/159) 
Test sentences 79% (89/113) 
Recall 
85%(130/153) 
77% (89/115) 
Training sentences {example sentences (43 sentences), a folk tale "KOBUTORI JIISAN" (Nakao 1985) (93 
sentences), an essay in "TENSEIJ1NGO" (26 sentences), an editorial (26 sentences), an article in "Scien
tific American (in Japanese)"(16 sentences)} 
Test sentences {a fork tale "TSURU NO ONGAESttI" (Nakao 1985) (91 sentences), two essays in "TEN
SEIJINGO" (50 sentences), an editorial (30 sentences), "Scientific American(in Japanese)" (13 sentences)} 
Table 2: Comparison 
Training sentences Precision 
Recall 
Test sentences Precision 
Recall 
Method 1 
82% (130/159) 
85% (130/153) 
79% (89/113) 92~, (78/85) 
77% (89/115) 68% (78/115) 
Method 2 Method 3 
92% (117/127) 72%(123/170) 
76%(117/153/ 80% (123/153) 
69% (79/114) 
69% (79/115) 
Method 4 
65% (138/213) 
90% (138/153) 
58% (92/159) 
80% (92/115) 
Method 1 : Tile method used in this work 
Method 2 : Only when it is estimated to be definite can it refer to tile entity denoted by a noun phrase 
Method 3 : No use of referential property 
Method 4 : No use of modifier constraint and possessor constraint 
Sometimes a notln can refer t.o the entity denoted 
by a noun that has a different modifier. In such 
cases, the system made an incorrect judgment. 
OJIISAN-WA CHII<AKU-NO OOKINA SUGI-NO 
(old man) (near) (huge) (cedar) 
KI-NO NEMOTO-NI ARU ANA-DE 
(tree) (base) (be at) (hole) 
AMAYADORI-WO SURU-KOTO-NI-StIITA. 
(take shelter from tile rain) (decide to do) 
(So, he decided to take shelter from the rain in a hole 
which is at the base of a huge cedar tree nearby.) 
(an omission of the middle part) 
TSUGI-NOHI, KONO OJIISAN-WA YAMA-HE ITTE, 
(next day) (this) (old man) (mountain) (go to) 
(The next clay, this man went to the inountain, ) 
SUGI-NO KI-NO NEMOTO-NO ANA-WO MITSUI<ETA. 
(cedar) (tree) (at base) (hole) (found) 
(and found the hole at. the base of the cedar tree.) 
The two instances of "ANA (hole)" in these sen
tences refer to the same entity. But our system 
judged that they do not refer to it because the mod
ifiers of the two instances of "ANA (hole)" are dif
ferent. In order to correctly analyze this case, it is 
necessary to decide whether the two different expres
sions are equal in meaning. 
6 Sun-mlary 
This paper describes a method for tile determination 
of referents of noun phrases by using their referen
tial properties, modifiers, and possessors. Using this 
method on training sentences, we obtained a preci
sion rate of 82% and a recall rate of 8.5% in the de
termination of referents of noun phrases that have 
antecedents. On test sentences, we obtained a pre
cision rate of 79% and a recall rate of 77%. This 
confirmed that the use of the referential properties, 
modifiers, and possessors of noun phrases is effective. 

References 

Sadao Kurohashi, Makoto Nagao. 1994. A Method of 
Case Structure Analysis for Japanese Sentences based 
on Examples in Case Frame Dictionary. the Insti
tute of Electronics, ln\]ormation and Communication 
Enginners Transactions on Information and Systems 
E77-D(2), pages 227-239. 

Masaki Murata, Makoto Nagao. 1993. Determination of 
referential property and nmnber of nouns in Japanese 
sentences for machine translation into English. Ill Pro
ceedings of the 5th TMI, pages 218-225, Kyoto, Japan, 
July. 

Kiyoaki Nakao. 1985. The Old Man with a Wen. Eiyaku 
Nihon Mukashibanashi Series, Vol. 7, Nihon Eigo Ky
ouiku Kyoukai (in Japanese). 

Yasuhiko Watanabe, Sadao Kurohashi, Makoto Nagao. 
1992. Construction of semantic dictionary by IPAL 
dictionary and a thesaurus, (in Japanese). In Proceed
ings of the 45th Convention of IPSJ, pages 213 214, 
~Ibkushima, Japan, July. 

