Consonant Spreading in Arabic Stems 
Kenneth R. BEESLEY 
Xerox Research Centre Europe 
Grenoble Laboratory 
6, chemin de Maupertuis 
38240 MEYLAN 
\]~¥aIICO 
Ken. Beesley@xrce. xerox, com 
Abstract 
'\]'his paper examines the phenomenon of conso
nant spreading in Arabic stems. Each spread
ing involves a local surface copying of an un
derlying consonant, and, in certain phonologi~ 
cal contexts, spreading alternates productively 
with consonant lengthening (or gemination). 
The mOrl)hophonemic triggers of spreading lit 
in the patterns or even in the roots themselves, 
and the combination of a spreading root and 
a spreading pattern causes a consonant to be 
coiffed mulliple times. The interdigitation of 
Arabic stems and the realization of consonant 
spreading are forlnalized using finite-state roof 
photactics and variation rules, and this al> 
preach has been successfully implemented in a 
large-scale Arabic morphological analyzer which 
is available for testing on the Internet. 
1 introduction 
Most formal analyses of Semitic languages, in
cluding Arabic. deDnd the reality of abstract, 
unpronounceable morphemes called ROOTS, 
consisting usually of three, but soinetimes two 
or four, consonants called RADICALS. The clas
sic examples include ktb (~. CJ '2) 1, al)pearing 
ill a number of words having to do with writ
ing, books, schools, etc.; and drs (~r' o z), ap
pearing in words having to do with studying, 
learning, teaching, etc. Roots combine non
concatenatively with t'ATTI,;flNS to form STt,;MS, 
a process known informally as INTERDIGITA
?'ION or 1NTBRCALATION. We shall look first 
at Arabic stems in general before examining 
GEMINATION and SPREADING, related phenom
ena wherein a single underlying radical is real
l"l'he Arabic-script examples in this paper were pro
duced using the ArabTeX package for \],~GX and DTEX by 
Prof. I)r. l(laus i, agally of the University of Stuttgart. 
daras 
duris 
darras 
duruus 
diraasa(t) 
darraas 
madrasa(t) 
madaaris 
lnadrasiyy 
tadriis 
'study' 
'be studied' 
'teach' 
'lessons' 
'study' 
'eager student' 
'school' 
'schools' 
'scholastic' 
'instruction' 
ve r I) 
verb 
verb 
noulI. 
noun 
Boun 
nottn 
ROllS 
adj-like 
sou n 
Figure 1: Some stems built on root drs 
ized multiple times in a surface string. Semilic 
morphology, including stem interdigitation and 
spreading, is adequately and elegantly fornializ
able using finite-state rules and operations. 
1.1 Arabic
Stems 
The stems in Figure 12 share the drs root mor
pheme, and indeed they are traditionally ol:
ganized under a drs heading in printed lexi
cons like the authoritative Dictionary of Alod
ern Written Arabic of Hans Wehr (197!)). 
A root morpheme like drs interdigitales with 
a pattern morpheme, or, in some analyses. 
with a pattern and a separate vocalization \[nor
pheme, to form abstract stems. Because inter
digitation involves pattern elements being in
serted between the radicals of the root mor
pheme, Semitic stem formation is a classic 
example of n on-concatenative inorphotactics. 
Separating and identifying the component mor
phemes of words is of course the core task of 
morphological analysis for any language, and 
analyzing Semitic stems is a classic challenge 
~The taa\] ) marbuuta, notated here as (t), is lhe fem
inine ending pronounced only in certain environments. 
Long consonants and long vowels are indicated here with 
gemination. 
117 
for any morphological analyzer. 
1.2 Interdigitation
as Intersection 
Finite-state morphology is based on the 
claim that both morphotactics and phonologi
cal/orthographical variation rules, i.e. the rela
tion of underlying forms to surface forms, can 
be formalized using finite-state automata (Ka
plan and Kay', 1981; Karttunen, 1.991; Kaplan 
and Kay, 1994). Although the most acces
sible computer implementations (Koskenniemi, 
1983; Antworth, 1990; Karttunen, 199a)of 
finite-state morphotactics have been limited to 
building words via the concatenation of mor
phemes, the theory itself does not have this limi
tation. In Semitic morphotactics, root and pat
tern morphemes (and, according to one's the
ory, perhaps separate vocalization morphemes) 
are naturally formalized as regular languages, 
and stems are formed by the intersection, rather 
than the concatenation, of these regular la.n
guages. Such analyses have been laid out else
where (Kataja and Koskelmiemi, 1988; Beesley, 
1998a: Beesley, 19981)) and cannot be repeated 
here. For present t)urt)oses, it will suffice to view 
morl)hophonelnic (underlying) stems as being 
formed from the intersection of a root and a pat
tern, where patterns contain vowels and C slots 
into which root radicals are, intuitively speak
ing, "plugged", as in the following Form I per
fect active and passive verb examples. 
Root: d r s k t b q t i 
Pattern: CaCaC CaCaC CaCaC 
Stem: daras katab qatal 
Root: d r s k t b q t i 
Pattern: CuCiC CuCiC CuCiC 
Stem : duris kutib qutil 
Prefixes and suffixes concatenate onto the stems 
in the usual way to form complete, but still mor
phophonemic, words; and finite-state variation 
rules are then applied to map the morphophone
mic strings into strings of surface phonemes or 
orthographical characters. For an overview of 
this approach, see Karttunen, Kaplan and Zae
nen (1992). 
Following Harris (1941) and Hudson (1986), 
and un\]ike McCarthy (1981), we also allow the 
patterns to contain non-radical consonants as 
in the following perfect active Form VII, Form 
VIII and Form X examples. 
Form VII Form VIII Form X 
Root: k t b k t b kt b 
Pattern: nCaCaC CtaCaC staCCaC 
Stem: nkatab ktatab staktab 
In this formalization, noun patterns work ex
actly like verb patterns, as in the following ex
amples: 
Root: k t b k t b kt b 
Pattern: CiCaaC CuCuC maCCuuC 
Stem: kitaab kutub maktuub 
Gloss : "book" "books" "letter" 
Where such straightforward intersection of 
roots and patterns into stems would appear to 
break down is in cases of gemination and spread
ing, where a single root radical appears nmltiple 
times in a surface stem. 
2 Arabic
Consonant Gemination and 
Spreading 
2.1 Gemination
in Forms II and V 
Some verb and noun stems exhibit a double re
alization (a copying) of an underlying radical, 
resulting in gemination 3 or spreading at the sur
face level. Looking at gemination first, it is best 
known fl'om verb stems known in the European 
tradition as Forms I\[ and V, where the middle 
radical is doubled. Kay's (1987) pattern nota
tion uses a G symbol before the C slot that 
needs to be doubled. 4 
3Gemination in Arabic words call alternatively be an
alyzed as consonant lengthening, as in Harris (1941) and 
as implied by Holes (1995). This solution is very attrac
tive if the goal is to generate fully-roweled orthograph
ical surface strings of Arabic, but for the phonological 
examples in this paper we adopt the gemination repre
sentation as used by phonologists like McCarthy (1981). 
4Kay,s stem-building mechanism, using a multi-tape 
transducer implemented in Prolog, sees G on the pattern 
tape and writes a copy of the middle radical on the stem 
tape without consuming it. Then tile following C does 
the same but consumes the radical sylnbol in the usual 
way. Kay's analysis in fact abstracts out the vocaliza
118 
Root: k t b d r s 
Pattern : CaGCaC CaGCaC 
Stem: kattab darras 
\]n the sanle spirit, but with a different mecha
nism, our Form II and Form V patterns contain 
an X symbol that appears after the consonant 
slot to be copied. 
Root: k t b d r s 
\]Pattern: CaCXaC CaCXaC 
Stem: katXab darXas 
:ks in all cases, the stem is formed by straight
forward intersection, resulting in abstract stems 
like darXas. The X symbol is subsequently re
alized via finite-state variation rules as a copy of 
the preceding consonant in a phonological gram
mar (/darras/) or, in an orthographical system 
such as ours, as an optionally written shadda di
acritic (~_~3). Finite-state rules to effect such 
limited local copying are trivially written, s 
2.2 Geminatlon/Spreadlng in Form IX 
Spreading. which appears to involve consonant 
copying over intervening phonenms, is not so 
ditl'erent from gemination; and indeed it is com
nlon in "spreading" vert) stems for the spread
lug to alternate productively with gemination. 
The best known example of Arabic consonant 
spreading is the verbal stem known as Form 
IX (the same behavior is also seen in Form 
XI, Form XIV, b'orm QIV and in several noun 
tbrms). A tyl)ical example is the root dhm 
(~. a z), whM, in 1.'orm IX has the meaning "be
come t)lack". 
Spreading is not terribly common in Modern 
Standard Arabic, but it occurs in enough verb 
and noun forms to deserve, in our opinion, full 
treatment. In our lexicon of about 4930 roots, 
tion, placing it on a separate transducer tape, but this 
difference is not important here. For extensions of this 
multi-tape approach see Kiraz (1994; 1996). The cur
rent approach differs from the inulti-tape a.pproaches in 
formalizing tools, patterns and vocalizations as regular 
languages and t) 3" conH)uting ("linearizing") the stems 
at compile time via intersection of these regular lan
guages (Beesley, 1998a; Beesley, 1998b). 
SSee, for ex~tmf)le, the rules of Antworth (1990) for 
handling the limited reduplication seen in Tagalog. 
byd. 
hlllr 
hwl 
xdr 
x.dl 
dhm 
rbd 
rfd 
zrq 
zwr 
SiIlr 
swd 
fqr 
J'mt. 
sfr 
shb 
xbr 
qtm 
kind 
d C 
E ,2" Oo dz3 
0_~5 
a 
jdc rv: ,.r,. o o~, 
¢.od 
'become white' 
'turn red' 'blush' 
'be cross-eyed' 'squint' 
'become green' 
'be moist' 
'become black' 
'become ashen' 'glower' 
'drip' 'scatter' 'break up' 
'be bhte in color' 
'alienate' 
'becol-ne brown' 
'become black' 
'be of fair complexion' 
'turn gray' 
'turn yellow/pale' 
'become reddish' 
'be crooked' 'be bent' 
'be dust-colored' 
'be dark-colored • 
'become smutty/dark' 
Figure 2: Roots that combine with Form 1X 
patterns 
20 have Form IX possibilities (see Figure 2)• 
Most of them (but not all) share the general 
meaning of being or becoming a certain color. 
McCarthy (1981\[) and others (Kay, 19~7: l(i
raz, 1994; Bird and l~la.cklmrn, J 991) postulate 
an underlying li'orm I.X stem for dhm that looks 
like dhamanl, with a spreading of the linal m 
radical; other writers like Beeston (1968)list the 
stem as dhamm, with a geminated or length
ened final radical• In fact, both .forms do oc
cur in N.11 surface words as shown in Figure 3, 
and the difference is productively and straight
forwardly phonological. For perfect endings like 
+a ('he') and +at ('she'), the final consonant is 
geminated (or "lengthened", depending on you r 
formal point of view)• If, however• the suffix be
gins with a consonant, as in q-tu (T) or +ta 
('you, masc. sg.'), then the separated or true 
spreading occurs. 
From a phonological view, and reflecting the 
119 
dhamln+a ¢~a! 'he turned black' 
dhalnam+tu c~.~g-;! 'I turned black' 
Figure 3: Form IX Gemination vs. Spreading 
notation of Beeston, it is tempting to formal
ize the underlying Form IX perfect active pat
tern as CCaCX so that it intersects with root 
dhm to forln dhamX. When followed by a suf
fix beginning with a vowel such as +a or +at, 
phonologically oriented variation rules would re
alize the X as a copy of the preceding consonant 
(/dhamm/). Arabic abhors consonant clus
ters, and it resorts to various "chlster busting" 
techniques to elilninate them. The final I)hono
logical realization would include an epentheti
cal /?i/ on the front, to break up the dh clus
ter, and would treat the copied m as the on
set of a syllable that includes the suffix: /?id
ham-ma/, or, orthographically, ~A.; !. When 
followed by a suffix beginning with a conso
nant, as in dhamX-ktn, the three-consolmnt 
chlster would need to be broken up by another 
epenthetic vowel as in /?id-ha-mam-tu/, o1", 
orthographically, ~.~-~!. tIowever, for reasons 
to become clearer below when we look at bilit
eral roots, we defined an underlying Form IX 
perfect active pattern CCaCaX leading to ab
stract stems like dhamaX. 
2.3 Other
Cases of Final Radical 
Gemination/Spreading 
Other verb forlns where the final radical is 
copied include the rare Forms XI and XIV. Root 
lhj (.~ o $) intersects with the Form XI perfect 
active pattern CCaaCaX to form the abstract 
stein lhaajaX ("curdle"/"coagnlate"), leading 
to surface forms like /?il-haaj-ja/ (.~!) and 
/?il-haa-jaj-tu/ (,~Z.'~j)that vary exactly 
as in Form IX. The same holds for root shb 
(~. a ~,,), which takes both Form IX (shabaX) 
and Form XI (shaabaX), both lneaning "be
colne reddish". In Ol11" lexicon, one root qqs 
(~y ~_ d~) takes forln XIV, with l)atterns like the 
perfect active CCanCaX and imperfect active 
CCanCiX ("be pigeon-breasted"). Other sin-> 
ilar Form XIV examples probably exist but are 
not reflected ill the current dictionary. 
Aside from the verbal nouns and partici
ples of Forms IX, XI and XIV, other noun-like 
patterns also involve the spreading of the fi
nal radical. These include CiCCiiX and Ca
CaaCiiX, taken by roots nhr (o ~_ O), mean
ing "skilled/experienced", and r~d (a ~.j) 
meaning "coward/cowardly". The CaCaaCiiX 
pattern also serves as the broken (i.e. ir
regular) plural for CuCCuuX stems for the 
roots zqr (o ~5) meaning "ill-tempered", shr 
(o ~_ d") meaning "thrush/blackbird', lgd 
(a ~_ J) meaning "chin". and t.hr (~ ~ &) and 
t.xr (o ~_ &), both ineaning "cloud". When an 
X appears after a long vowel as in tuxruuX, 
it is Mways realized as a full copy of the pre
vious consonaut as in /tuxruur/ (3~), 1lo 
matter what follows. 
2.4 Middle
Radical 
Gemination/Spreadlng 
Just as Forms II and V involve gemination of the 
middle radical, other forms inchlding Form XII 
involve the separated spreading of the middle 
radical. A preceding diphthong, like a preceding 
long vowel, causes X to be realized as a full 
copy of the preceding consonant, as shown in 
the following examples. 
Root: 
Pattern: 
Stem: 
Surface: 
Form: 
Gloss: 
hd b 
CCawXaC 
hdawXab 
hdawdab 
Form XII perfect active 
"be vaulted" "be embossed" 
Root: xf n 
Pattern: CCawXiC 
Stem: x~awXin 
Surface: xfawfin 
Form: Form XII imperfect active 
Gloss: "be rough" 
Root: 
Pattern: 
Stem: 
Surface: 
Form: 
Gloss: 
xd b 
muCCawXiC 
muxdawXib 
muxdawdib 
Form Xll active participle 
"become green" 
120 
1 a 111 nl JK Lt\[ 
1 
1. anl atn JF t u 
) o~ ~" 
l"igurc 4: Biliteral Form I Steins 
Loot: xd r 
Pattern: CCiiXaaC 
Stem: xdiiXaar 
Surface: xdiidaar 
Form: Form XII verbal noun 
Gloss: "become green" 
A number of nouns have broken plurals that also 
involve spreading of the middle radical, con
trasting with gemination in the singular. 
x f f "bat" 
 ueXaaf 
singular gemination 
x f f "bats" plural spreading 
 aeaaXiif 
d b r "hornet" 
) dabXuur J Y. a 
singular gemination 
d b r "hornets" plural spreading 
dabaaXiir ~j.~ ~ 3 
.A few other \])alterns show tile same })ehavior. 
\.Vhile not especially common, there are more 
roots that take middle-radical-spreading noun 
patterns than take the better-known Form IX 
verb patterns. 
3 Biliteral
Roots 
:ks poinled out in Mc(',arthy (1981, p. 396
7), the gemiual.ion vs. spreading behavior of 
Form \[X stems is closely pa.ralleled by Form 
l stems involving traditionally analyzed "bilit
eral" or "geminating" roots such as tnl (also 
characterized as tmm) and sm (possibly stain) 
and many others of the same ilk. As shown in 
Figure 4, these roots show Form I gemination 
with suffixes beginning with a vowel vs. full 
spreading when the suffix begins with a conso
nant. Ilowever Form IX is handled, these par
allels strongly suggest that the exact same un
derlying forlns and wlriations rules should also 
handle tile form I of biliteral roots. 
llowever, the Form i perfect active pattern, 
in the current notation, is simply CaCaC (or 
Root: k t b k t b 
Pattern: CaCaC CaCaC 
Lexicah katab+a katab+tu 
Surface: katab a katab tu 
Orthography: "J -~ 
Figure 5: Ordinary Form I behavior 
Root: t m X t m X 
Pattern: CaCaC CaCaC 
Lexical: tamaX+a tamaX+tu 
Surface: lamina tamalntu 
Orthograt)hy: -'-" , o." • (. c.~ 
Figure 6: Biliteral tm formalized as tmX 
idiosyncratically for SOllle roots, CaCuC or 
CaCiC). As shown in Figure 5, there is no ev
idence, for normal triliteral roots like ktb, that 
any kind of copying is specified by the Form \[ 
pattern itself. 
Keeping CaCaC as the Form 1 perfect active 
pattern, the behavior of biliteral roots falls out 
effortlessly if they are formalized not as sm and 
tm, nor as smm a.nd tram, l)ut as smX and 
tmX, with the copying-trigger X as tim thir(1 
radical of the root itself. Such roots intersect 
in the normal way with triliteral patterns as in 
Figure 6, and they are mapped to apl)ropriate 
surface strings using the same rules that realize 
Form IX stems. 
4 Rules

The TWOLC rule (Karttunen and Beesley, 1992) 
that mal)S an X, coming either fronl roots like 
tmX or from patterns like Form IX CCaCaX. 
into a copy of the previous consonant is lhe fol
lowing, where Cons is a grammar-level variable 
ranging freely over consonants, LongVowel is a 
grammar-level variable ranging freely over long 
vowels and diphthongs, and C is an indexed lo
cal variable ranging over the ennnlerated set of 
consonants. 
X:C <=> 
:C \:Cons+ _ Z+: Cons ; 
:C LongVowel _ ; 
:C X: : _ ; 
where C in (b t 0 j h x d 6 r z 
imnhwy); 
121 
The rule, which ill fact compiles into 2Y rules, 
one for each enumerated consonant, realizes un
derlying X as surface C if and only if one of the 
following cases applies: ~ 
• First Context: X is preceded by a sur
face C and one or more non-consonants, 
and is followed by a suffix beginning 
with a consonant. This context matches 
lexical dhamaXq-tu, realizing X as m 
(ultimately wrkten "~dig-~!), but not 
~.o dhamaXq-a, which is written ~z!. 
• Second Context: X is preceded by a surface 
C and a long vowel or diphthong, no matter 
what tollows. This maps lexical dabaaXiir 
to dabaabiir (_.~U3). 
• Third Context: X is preceded by a surface 
C, another X and any symbol, no matter 
what follows. This matches the second X 
in samXaXq-tu and samXaX+a to pro
duce samXam+tu and samXamq-a re
spectively, with ullimate orthographical re
alizations such as c...~ ~ and "~-z ~. 
In the current system, where the goal is to 
recognize and generate orttlographical words 
of Modern Standard Arabic, as represented in 
IS08859-6, UNICODE or an equivalent encod
ing. the default or "elsewhere" case is for X to 
be realized optionally as a shadda diacritic. 
5 Multiple
Copies of Radicals 
When a biliteral root like smX intersects with 
the Form II pattern CaCXaC, the abstract 
result is the stem samXaX. The radical m 
gets geminated (or lengthened) once and spread 
once to form surface phonological phonological 
strings like /sammama/ and /sammamtu/, 
which become o,'thograI)hical "/x z and "~ re
spectively. And if both roots and patterns can 
contain X, then the possibility exists that a 
copying root could combine with a copying pat
tern, requiring a full double spreading of a rad
ical in the surface string. This in fact happens 
in a single example (in the present lexicon) with 
~The full rule contains several other contexts a.nd fine 
distinctions that do not bear on the data presented here. 
For example, the w in the set C of consonants must be 
distinguished from the w-like offglide of diphthongs. 
Root: m k X 
Pattern: CaCaaXiiC 
Abstract stem: makaaXiiX 
Surface: makaakiik 
Gloss: "shuttles" 
Figure 7: Double Consonant Spreading 
the root mkX, which combines legally with the 
noun pattern CaCaaXiiC as in Figure 7. In 
the surface string makaakiik ("shuttles"), or
thographically • .&p~, the middle radical k is 
spread twice. The variation rules handle this 
and the smX examples without difficulty. 
6 System
Status 
The current morphological analyzer is based 
on dictionaries and rules licensed from an ear
lier project at ALPNET (Beesley, 1990), re
built completely using Xerox finite-state tech
nology (Beesley, 1996; Beesley, 1998a). The 
current dictionaries contain 4930 roots, each 
one hand-coded to indicate the subset of pat
terns with which it legally combines (Buck
walter, 1990). Roots and patterns are inter
sected (Beesley, 1998b) at compile time to yield 
90,000 stems. Various combinations of prefixes 
and suffixes, concatenated to the stems, yield 
over 72,000,000 abstract words. Sixty-six finite
state variation rules map these abstract strings 
into fully-voweled orthographical strings, and 
additional trivial rules are then applied to op
tionally delete short vowels and other diacritics, 
allowing the system to analyze unvoweled, par
tially voweled, and fully-roweled orthographical 
strings. 
The full system, including a Java interface 
that displays both input and output in Arabic 
script, is available for testing on the Internet 
at http ://www. xrce. xerox, com/research/ 
raltt/arabic/. 
122 

References 

Evan L. Antworth. 1990. PC-KIMMO: a twolevel processor for morpholoyical analysis. Number 16 in Occasional publications in academic computing. Summer Institute of Linguistics, Dallas. 

1,2enneth R. Beesley. 1990. t,'inite-state description of Arabic lnorphology. In Proceedings of the ,%cond Cambridge ConfercT~cc on \[lili~gual (,'omputi~z 9 in Arabic and English, September 5-7. No l)agination. 

Kenneth R. Beesley. 1996. Arabic finite-state morphological analysis and generation. In COLING'96, volume 1, pages 89--9.1, Copenhagen, August 5-9. Center for Sprogteknologi. The 16th international Conference on Computational Linguistics. 

Kenneth R. Beesley. 1998a. Arabic morphological analysis on the lnternet. In ICI?MCO-98, Cambridge, April 17-18. Centre for Middle Eastern Studies. Proceedings of the 6th International (!onference and t';xhibition on Multi-lingual Computing. Paper number 3.1.1; no pagination. 

Kenneth R. Beesley. 1998b. Arabic stem morphotaetics via finite-state intersection. Paper presented at the 12th Symposium on Arabic Linguistics. Arabic Linguistic Society, 6-7 March, 1998, Champaign, IL. 

h. F. L. Beeston. 1968. Written Arabic: an approach to the basic structures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Steven Bird and Patrick Blackburn. 1991. A logical at)proach to Arabic phonology. In EACZ-9I, pages 89 9-1. 

Timothy A. Buckwalter. 1990. Lexicographic notation of Arabic noun pattern morphemes and their inflectional features. In Proceedilzg.s of th~ Second Cambridge Co~@rcncc on Bili~gual Computi~g in Arabic and English, September 5-7. No pagination. 

Zelig tIarris. 1941. Linguistic structure of Hebrew. ,\]our'~zal of the American Oriental Society, 62:1,13-167. Clives \]Ioles. 199:5. Modern Arabic: Structures, Fu~ctions and Varieties. Longlnan, London. 

Grover ttudson. 1986. Arabic root and pattern morphology without tiers. Journal of Lingtlistics, 22:85 122. Reply to McCarthy:1981. 

Ronald M. Kaplan and Martin Kay. 1981. Phonological rules and finite-state transducers. In Linguistic Society of America Meeting Handbook, Fifty-Sixth Annual Meeting, New York, December 27-30. Abstract. 

Ronald M. Kaplan and Martin Kay. 1994. Regular models of phonological rule systems. Computational Linguistics , 20(3):331-378. 

Lauri Karttunen and Kenneth R. Beesley. 1992. Two-level rule compiler. Technical Report ISTL-92-2, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA, October. 

Lauri Karttunen, Ronald M. Kaplan, and Anlfie Zaenen. 1992. Two-level morphology wilh composition. In COLING'92, pages 1/11 148, Nantes, France, August 23-28

Lauri Karttunen. 1991. Finite-state constraints. In Proccedings of the International Conference on Current Issues i~ Computational Linguistics, Penang, Malaysia, June 10-14. Universiti Sains Malaysia. 

Lauri Karttunen. 1993. Finite-state lexicon compiler. Technical Report ISTL-NLTT1993-04-02, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center, Palo Alto, CA, April. 

Laura Kataja and Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1988. Finite-state description of Semitic morphology: A case study of Ancient Akkadian. In COLING '88, pages ala-315. 

Martin Kay. 1987. Noncoucatenative finite-state morphology. In Proceedings of the Third Conference of the E'uropean C7lapter of the Association for Computatiorzal Linyui.stics , pages 2--10. 

George Kiraz. 1994. Multi-tape two-level roof phology: a case study in Semitic non-linear morphology. In COLING'9/~, volume 1, pages 180-186. 

George Anton Kiraz. 1996. Computing prosodic morphology. In COLLYG'95. 

Kimmo Koskenniemi. 1983. Two-level ,norphology: A general compntational model for word-form recognition and production. Publication 11, University of Helsinki, l)epart~ ment of General l,inguistics, tIelsinki. 

John J. McCarthy. 1981. A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology. Linguistic I~quiry, 12(3):373-418. 

Hans Wehr. 1979. A Dictionary of ModcrIYritten Arabic. Spoken Language Services. Inc., Ithaca, NY, 4 edition. Edited by a. Milton Cowan. 123 

