A Concept-based Adaptive Approach to Word Sense 
Disambiguation 
Jen Nan Chen Jason S. Chang 
Department of Computer Science Department of Computer Science 
National Tsing Hua University National Tsing Hua University 
Hsinchu 30043, Taiwan Hsinchu 30043, Taiwan 
jnchen@mcu.edu.tw jschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw 
Abstract 
Word sense disambiguation for 
unrestricted text is one of the most difficult 
tasks in the fields of computational 
linguistics. The crux of the problem is to 
discover a model that relates the intended 
sense of a word with its context. This 
paper describes a general framework for 
adaptive conceptual word sense 
disambiguation. Central to this WSD 
framework is the sense division and 
semantic relations based on topical 
analysis of dictionary sense definitions. 
The process begins with an initial 
disambiguation step using an MRD
derived knowledge base. An adaptation 
step follows to combine the initial 
knowledge base with knowledge gleaned 
from the partial disambiguated text. Once 
the knowledge base is adjusted to suit the 
text at hand, it is then applied to the text 
again to finalize the disambiguation result. 
Definitions and example sentences from 
LDOCE are employed as training materials 
for WSD, while passages from the Brown 
corpus and Wall Street Journal are used for 
testing. We report on several experiments 
illustrating effectiveness of the adaptive 
approach. 
1 Introduction

Word sense disambiguation for unrestricted text 
is one of the most difficult tasks in the fields of 
computational linguistics. The crux of the 
problem is to discover a model that relates the 
intended sense of a word with its context. It 
seems to be very difficult, if not impossible, to 
statistically acquire enough word-based 
knowledge about a language necessary to build a 
robust system capable of automatically 
disambiguating senses in unrestricted text. For 
such a system to be effective, a great deal of 
balanced materials must be assembled in order 
to cover many idiosyncratic aspects of the 
language. There exist three issues in a 
lexicalized statistical word sense disambiguation 
(WSD) model data sparseness, lack of a level 
of abstraction, and static learning strategy. 
First, word-based models have a plethora of 
parameters that are difficult to estimate reliably 
even with a very large corpus. Under-trained 
models lead to low precision. Second, word
based models lack a degree of abstraction that is 
crucial for a broad coverage system. Third, a 
static WSD model is unlikely to be robust and 
portable, since it is very difficult to make a 
single static model relevant to a wide variety of 
unrestricted texts. Recent WSD systems have 
been developed using word-based model for 
specific limited domain to disambiguate senses 
appearing in usually easy context (Leacock, 
Towell, and Voorlees 1996) with a lot of typical 
salient words. For unrestricted text, however, 
the context tends to be very diverse and difficult 
to capture with a lexicalized model, therefore a 
corpus-trained system is unlikely to port to new 
domains and run off the shelf. 
Generality and adaptiveness are therefore 
key to a robust and portable WSD system. A 
concept-based model for WSD requires less 
parameter and has an element of generality built 
in (Liddy and Paik 1993). Conceptual classes 
make it possible to generalize from word
specific context in order to disambiguate a word 
sense appearing in a particularly unfamiliar 
context in term of word recurrences. An 
adaptive system armed with an initial lexical and 
conceptual knowledge base extracted from 
machine-readable dictionaries (MRDs), has two 
strong advantages over static lexicalized models 
trained using a corpus. First, the initial 
237 
knowledge is rich and unbiased such that a 
substantial portion of text can be disambiguated 
precisely. Second, based on the result of initial 
disambiguated text. Subsequently, the 
knowledge base is adjusted to suit the text at 
hand. The adjusted knowledge base is then 
~_ Machine Readable Dictionary 1 
Machine Readable Thesaurus 
Initialized Knowledge Base 
Word Sense Lexical and Conceptual Context ..................................................... 
bank-GEO river lake land ... 
OEOMOTIO. _ 
bank-MONEY money account bill .., 
-MONEY COMMERCE ... Z 
I investigation of bank che& fraud v I investigation of bInk/MONEY check fraud/CRIME W 12~igS:째l: and r째hbed bankl' 1' ~-~ Z looted st ....... ~e:k.f.raud/CRiME ._ ~ 
/\[ 3. adeerneartheriverbank . \[ k..\]../ " I 3adeer/nSlMnLneartheriverbanlgGEO._ \[ / 
L ~ ^"'"kv째le ) i L 4 ~b..~',',, ~o,o _ .. . 3 
bank-GEO river lake land deer near ,.. \[ ~-~ 
GEO MOTION ANIMAL .,. I N 
I bank-MONEY money account bill ~ check fraud \] \ 
\[ ~ MONEY COMMERCE CRIME ... _J 
/ 
WSD Result \] 
( I investigation of hank/MONEY check fraud/CRIME ~1 ) / / | 2 looted/CRIME stores and robbed/CRIME banks/MONEY, \] / 
\] 3 .... a deer/ANIMAL near the river bank/GEO . I . L 4 A 
bank IGEO vole/ANIMAL 5 
Figure I General framework for WSD using MRD. 
disambiguation, an adaptation step is taken to 
make the knowledge base more relevant to the 
task at hand, leading to broader and more 
precise WSD. 
Figure 1 lays out the general framework for 
an adaptive conceptual WSD approach, under 
which this research is being carried out. The 
learning process described here begins with a 
step of knowledge acquisition from MRDs. 
With the acquired knowledge, the system reads 
the input text and starts the step of initial 
disambiguation. Adaptive step follows to 
combine the initial knowledge base with 
knowledge gleaned from the partially 
applied to the text again to finalize the 
disambiguation result. For instance, Figure 1 
shows the initial contextual representation (CR) 
extracted from the Longman Dictionary of 
Contemporary English (Protor 1978, LDOCE) 
for the GEO-bank sense contained both lexical 
and conceptual information: {land, river, 
lake .... } u {GEO, MOTION .... }. The initial 
CR is informative enough to disambiguate a 
passage containing a deer near the river bank in 
the input text. The initial disambiguation step 
produces sense tagging of deer~ANIMAL and 
bank~GEOGRAPHY, but certain instances of 
bank are left untagged for lack of relevant WSD 
238 
knowledge. For instance, the GEO-bank sense 
in the context of vole is unresolved since there is 
no information linking ANIMAL context to 
GEOGRAPHY sense of bank. The adaptation 
step adds deer and ANIMAL to the contextual 
representation for GEO-bank. The enriched 
CR therefore contains information capable of 
disambiguating the instance of bank in the 
context of vole to produce final disambiguation 
result. 
2 Acquiring
Conceptual Knowledge 
from MRD 
In this section we apply a so-called ?bpSense 
algorithm (Chen and Chang 1998) to acquire CR 
for MRD senses. The current implementation 
of TopSense uses the topical information in 
Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English 
(McArthur 1992, LLOCE) to represent WSD 
knowledge for LDOCE senses. In the 
following subsections we describe how that is 
done. 
2.1 Contextual
Representation from 
MRDs 
Dictionary is a text whose subject matter is a 
language. The purpose of dictionary is to 
provide definitions of word senses, and in the 
process it supply knowledge not just about the 
language, but the world (Wilks et al. 1990). A 
good-sized dictionary usually has a large 
vocabulary and good coverage of word senses 
useful for WSD. However, short MRD 
definitions and examples per se lack a level of 
abstraction to function effectively as a 
contextual representation of word sense. On 
the other hand, the thesaurus organizes word 
senses into a fixed set of coarse semantic 
categories and thus could potentially be useful 
as the basis of a conceptual CR of word sense. 
To get the best of both worlds of dictionary and 
thesaurus, we propose to link an MRD sense to 
thesaurus categories to produce conceptual 
representation of its context. Content words 
extracted directly from the definition sentence of 
a word sense can be put to use as the word-level 
contextual representation of that particular word 
sense. 
One way of producing such conceptual CR 
is to link MRD senses to their relevant thesaurus 
senses and categories. These links furnish the 
MRD senses with information necessary for 
building a conceptual CR. We will describe 
one such approach under which each MRD 
sense is linked to a relevant thesaurus sense 
according to its defining words. The linked 
thesaurus sense, unlike the isolated MDR sense, 
falls within a certain semantic category. 
Consequently, we can establish relations 
between defining words and semantic category 
that eventually lead to conceptual CR. 
With the word lists in a thesaurus category 
cast as a document representing a certain subject 
matter or topic, the task of constructing 
conceptual representation of context for a certain 
MRD sense bears a striking resemblance to the 
document retrieval task in information retrieval 
(IR) research. Relatively well-established IR 
techniques of weighting terms and ranking 
documents are applied to build a list of topics 
that are most relevant to the definition of each 
MRD sense. This list of ranked topics, for a 
particular word sense, forms a vectorized 
conceptual representation of context in the space 
of all possible topics. 
2.2 Illustrative
Example 
One example is given in this subsection to 
illustrate how TopSense works. 
Example 1. Conceptual representation of an 
LDOCE sense 
erane.l.n.1, a machine for lifting and moving 
heavy objects by means of a very 
strong rope or wire fastened to a 
movable arm (JIB). 
For the most relevant topics to fine-grained 
sense, we get the following ranked list Hd 
(EQUIPMENT), Ha (MATERIALS), Ma 
(MOVING). 
Furthermore, the definition and examples 
of a particular sense on the surface level seldom 
are information sufficient to represent context of 
the sense. For instance, the words machine, lift, 
move, heavy, object, strong, rope, wire, fasten, 
movable, arm,jib in the definition of the sense, 
erane.l.n.1, are hardly enough contextual 
information to resolve a erane.l.n.1 instance in 
the Brown corpus shown below: 
Unsinkable slowed and stopped, hundreds of 
brilliant white flares swayed eerily clown from 
239 
the black, the air raid sirens ashore rose in a 
keening shriek, the anti-aircraft guns coughed 
and chatteredand above it all motors roared 
and the bombs came whispering and wailing 
and crashing down among the ships at anchor at 
Bari. They had come from airports in the 
Balkans, these hundred-odd Junkers 88's. 
They had winged over the Adriatic, they had 
taken Bari by complete surprise and now they 
were battering her, attacking with deadly skill. 
They had ruined the radar warning system with 
their window, they had made themselves 
invisible above their flares. And they also had 
the lights of the city, the port wall lanterns, and 
a shore crane's spotlight to guide on. 
However, with a level of abstraction made 
possible by using a thesaurus, it is not difficult 
to build a conceptual CR of word sense, which is 
intuitively more effective for WSD. For 
instance, based on LLOCE topics, the 
conceptual CR (EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS, 
MOVING) derived from the definition of 
erane.l.n.1, is general enough to characterize 
many salient words appearing in the context of 
the erane.l.n.1 instance, including motor 
(EQUIPMENT), lantern (EQUIPMENT), and 
flare (EQUIPMENT, MATERIALS). 
3 The
Adaptive WSD Algorithm 
We sum up the above descriptions and outline 
the procedure for the algorithm in this section. 
In what follows an adaptive disambiguation 
algorithm based on class-based approach will be 
described. Next, we give an illustrative 
example to show how the proposed algorithm 
works for unrestricted text. 
3.1 The
algorithm 
The proposed algorithm starts with the step of 
initial disambiguation using the contextual 
representation CR(W, S) derived from the MRD 
for the sense S of the head entry W. A step of 
adaptation followed to produce a knowledge 
base from the partially disambiguated text. 
Finally, the undisambiguated part is 
disambiguated according to the newly acquired 
knowledge base. The following algorithm 
gives a formal and detailed description of 
adaptive WSD. 
Algorithm AdaptSense 
Step 1: Preprocess the context and produce a 
list of lemmatized content words 
CON(W) in a polysemous word W's 
context. 
Step 2: For each sense S of W, compute the 
similarity between the context 
representation CR(W, S) and topical 
context CON(W). 
Sim ( CR(W, 5), CON(W)) 
)2 (w,.~ + w, ) where 
t c M 
Z w,~+ Y w, 
teCR(W,S) tcCON(W) 
M = CR(w, S)   CON(W), 
Wt, s = weight of a contextual word t 
with sense S in CR(W, S), 
1 W
t = weight oft in CON(W) ,\]\]-~,l 
vl tl 
Xt = distance from t to W in number of 
words. 
Step 3: For each word W, choose a relevant 
sense Sw if passes a preset threshold then 
construct triples T={(W, S, CON(W))}. 
Step4: Compute a new set of contextual 
representation CR(W,S) = { u luECON(W) 
and (W, S, CON(W))e T } 
Step 5: Infer remaining less relevant sense for 
W in CON 
3.2 Illustrative
Example 
Consider the following passage from the Brown 
corpus: 
... Of cattle in a pasture without throwin' 'era 
together for the purpose was called a "pasture 
count". The counters rode through the pasture 
countin' each bunch of grazin' cattle, and drifted 
it back so that it didn't get mixed with the 
uncounted cattle ahead. This method of countin' 
was usually done at the request, and in the 
presence, of a representative of the bank that 
held the papers against the herd. The notes and 
mortgages were spoken of as "cattle paper". 
A "book count" was the sellin' of cattle by the 
books, commonly resorted to in the early days, 
sometimes much to the profit of the seller. This 
led to the famous sayin' in the Northwest of the 
"books won't freeze". This became a common 
byword durin' the ... 
In our experiment, we observed that hold 
and paper are related to both MONEY and 
ROAD sense in the initial knowledge base. 
240 
Thus, this instance of hank is left 
unresolved in the initial disambiguation 
step. The adaptation step discovers that 
both hold and paper co-occur with some 
MONEY-bank instances in the partially 
disambiguated text. Therefore, the 
system is able to correctly resolve this bank 
instance to MONEY sense. 
4 Experiments
and Discussions 
4.1 Experiment

In our experiment, we use the materials of text 
windows of 50 words to the left and 50 words to 
the right of thirteen polysemous words in the 
Brown corpus and a sample of Wall Street 
Journal articles. All instances of these thirteen 
words are first disambiguated by two human 
judges. For these thirteen words under 
investigation, only nominal senses are 
considered. The experimental results show that 
the adaptive algorithm disambiguated correctly 
71% and 77% of these test cases in thc Brown 
corpus and the WSJ sample. Table 1 provides 
further details. However, there are still room 
for improvement in the area of precision. 
Evidence have shown that by exploiting the 
constraint of so-called "one sense per 
discourse," (Gale, Church and Yarowsky 1992b) 
and the strategy of bootstrapping (Yarowsky 
1995), it is possible to boost coverage, while 
maintaining about the same level of precision. 
4.2 Discussions

Although it is often difficult to compare studies 
on different text domain, genre and experimental 
setup, the approach presented here seems to 
compare favorably with the experimental results 
reported in previous WSD research. Luk (1995) 
experiments with the same words we use except 
the word bank and reports that there are totally 
616 instances of these words in the Brown 
corpus, (slightly less than the 749 instances we 
have experimented on). Thc author reports that 
60% of instances are resolved correctly using 
the definition-based concept co-occurrence 
(DBCC) approach. Leacock et al. (1996) 
report that precision rate of 76% for 
disambiguating the word line in a sample of 
WSJ articles. 
One of the limiting factors of this approach 
is the quality of sense definition in the MRD. 
Short and vague definitions tend to lead to 
inclusion of inappropriate topics in the 
contextual representation. Using inferior CR, it 
is not possible to produce enough and precise 
samples in the initial step for subsequent 
adaptation. 
Table l(a) I)isambiguation results for thirteen 
ambiguous words in Brown coipus. 
Word # of # of 
senses instances 
bank 8 97 
bass 2 16 
bow 5 12 
cone 2 14 
duty 2 75 
galley 3 4 . 
interest .... 4 346 
issue 4 141 
mole 2 zl 
sentence 2 32 
slug 5 ' 8 
star "6 "46 
taste 3 51 
T0tal " " 846' 
Precision 
Without With 
adaptation adaptation 
# of correct 
68 71 
i6 16 
3 3 
14 14 
67 69 
4 4 
213 228 
67 88 
2 2 
30 30 
4 6 
28 29 
36 36 
552 596 
65.2% 70.5% 
\]'able l(b) Disambiguation results 
ambiguous words in 
Journal articles. 
Word # of # of 
senses instances 
for thirteen 
Wall Street 
Without 
adaptation 
With 
adaptation 
370 353 
2 2 
25 22 
'221 127 
260 177 
째12 12 
698 
bank 8 
bass 2 
bow 5 
i one 2 
duty 2 
galley 3 
interest 4 
issue 4 
mole ! 2 
se-ntence\] 2 
slug 5 
star 6 
taste 3 
~l'otal 
Precision 
9O3 
77.3% 
#of correct 
350 
2 
f , , 19 
123 
181 
= 
ll 
3 
692 
76.6% 
241 
The experiment and evaluation shows that 
adaptation is most effective when a high
frequency word with topically contrasting senses 
is involved. For low-frequency senses such as 
EARTH, ROW, and ROAD senses of bank, the 
approach does not seem to be very effective. 
For instance the following passage containing an 
instance of bank has the ROW sense but our 
algorithm fails to disambiguate it. 
... They sleptMynheer with a marvelously 
high-pitched snoring, the damn seahorse ivory 
teeth watching him from a bedside table. In 
the ballroom below, the dark had given way to 
moonlight coming in through the bank of 
french windows, it was a delayed moon, but 
now the sky had cleared of scudding black 
and the stars sugared the silver-gray sky. 
Martha Schuyler, old, slow, careful of foot, 
came down the great staircase, dressed in her 
best lace-drawn black silk, her jeweled shoe 
buckles held forward. 
Non-topical sense like ROW-bank can 
appeared in many situations, thus are very 
difficult to captured using a topical contextual 
representation. Local contextual representation 
might be more effective. 
Infrequent and non-topical senses are 
problematic due to data sparseness. However, 
that is not specific to the adaptive approach, all 
other approaches in the literature suffer the same 
predicament. Even with a static knowledge 
acquired from a very large corpus, these senses 
were disambiguated at a considerably lower rate. 
5 Related
approaches 
In this section, we review recent WSD literature 
from the prospective of types of contextual 
knowledge and different representational 
schemes. 
5.1 Topical
vs. Local Representation of 
Context 
5.1.1 Topical
Context 
With topical representation of context, the 
context of a given sense is reviewed as a bag of 
words without structure. Gale, Church and 
Yarowsky (1992a) experiment on acquiring 
topical context from substantial bilingual 
training corpus and report good results. 
5.1.2 Local
Context 
Local context includes the structured 
information on word order, distance, and 
syntactic feature. For instance, the local 
content of a line from does not suggest the same 
sense for the word line as a line for does. 
Brown et al. (1990) use the trigram model as a 
way of resolving sense ambiguity for lexical 
selection in statistical machine translation. 
This model makes the assumption that only the 
previous two words have any effect on the 
translation, thus word sense, of the next word. 
The model attacks the problem of lexical 
ambiguity and produces satisfactory results, 
under some strong assumption. A major 
problem with trigram model is that of long 
distance dependency. Dagan and Itai (1994) 
indicate that two languages are more informative 
than one; an English corpus is very helpful in 
disambiguating polysemous words in Hebrew 
text. Local context in the form of lexical 
relations are identified in a very large corpus. 
Brown, et al. (1991) describe a statistical 
algorithm for partitioning word senses into two 
groups. The authors use mutual information to 
find a contextual feature that most reliably 
indicates which of the senses of the French 
ambiguous word is used. The authors report a 
20% improvement in the performance of a 
machine translation system when the words are 
first disambiguated this way. 
5.2 Static
vs. Adaptive Strategy 
Of the recent WSD systems proposed in the 
literature, almost all have the property that the 
knowledge is fixed when the system completes 
the training phase. That means the acquired 
knowledge never expands during the course of 
disambiguation. Gale, et al. (1992a) report that 
if one had obtained a set of training materials 
with errors no more than twenty to thirty percent, 
one could iterate training materials selection just 
once or twice and have training sets that had less 
than ten percent errors. The adaptive approach 
is somehow similar to their idea of incremental 
learning and to the bootstrap approach proposed 
by Yarowsky (1995). However, both 
approaches are still considered static models 
which are changed only in the training phase. 
242 
6 Conclusions

We have described a new adaptive approach to 
word sense disambiguation. Under this 
learning strategy, first contextual representation 
for each word sense is built fiom the sense 
definition in MRD and represented as a 
weighted-vector of concepts represented as word 
lists in a thesaurus. Then the knowledge base 
is applied to the text for WSD in an adaptive 
fashion to improve on disambiguation precision. 
We have demonstrated that this approach has the 
potential of outperforming established static 
approaches. This performance is achieved 
despite the fact no lengthy training time or a 
very large corpus is required. It is evident that 
the WSD algorithms proposed herein are simple, 
take up little time and space, and most 
importantly, require no human intervention in all 
phases of WSD. Sense tagging of training 
material, knowledge acquisition from training 
data, and disambiguation all are done 
automatically. 
Acknowledgements 
This work is partially supported by ROC NSC 
grants 84-2213-E-007-023 and NSC 85-2213-E
007-042. We are grateful to Betty Teng and 
Nora Liu from Longman Asia Limited for the 
permission to use their lexicographical resources 
for research purpose. Finally, we would like to 
thank the anonymous reviewers for many 
constructive and insightful suggestions. 

References 

Brown, P. F., S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra, and R. L. Mercer (1991). Word-sense disambiguation using statistical methods. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 264270. 

Chen, J. N. and J. S. Chang (1998). Topical clustering of MRD senses based on information retrieval techniques'. Special Issue on Word Sense Disambiguation, Computational Linguistics, 24(1), pp 61-95. 

Dagan, I. and A. Itai (1994). Word Sense Disambiguation Using a second languagemonolingual corpus. Computational Linguistics, 20(4), pp 563-596. 

Gale, W. A., K. W. Church, and D. Yarowsky (1992a). Using bilingual materials to develop word sense disambiguation methods. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Theoretical and Methodological Issues in Machine Translation, pp 101-112. 

Gale, W. A., K. W. Church and D. Yarowsky (1992b). One sense per discourse. In Proceedings of the Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pp 233-237. 

Leacock, C., G. Towell, and E. M. Voorlees (1996). Towards building contextual representations of word senses' using statistical modeh'. In B. Boguraev and J. Pustejovsky, editor, Corpus Processing for Lexical Acquisition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 

Liddy, E. D. and W. Paik (1993). Document filtering using semantic information fi'om a machine readable dictionary. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pp 20-29. 

Luk, A. K. (1995). Statistical sense disambiguation with relatively small corpora using dictionary definitions. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 181-188. 

McArthur, T. (1992). Longman lexicon of contemporary English. Longman Group (Far East) Ltd., Hong Kong. 

Proctor, P. (ed.) (1978). Longman dictionary of contemporary English. Harlow: Longman Group. 

Wilks, Y. A., D. C. Fass, C. M. Guo, J. E. McDonald, T. Plate, and B. M. Slator (1990). Providing tractable dictionary tooh'. Machine Translation, 5, pp 99-154. 

Yarowsky, D. (1995). Unsupervised word sense disambiguation rivaling supervised methods. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 189196. 

