Aligning Articles in TV Newscasts and Newspapers 
Yasuhiko Watanabe 
Ryukoku University 
Seta, Otsu 
Shiga, Japan 
Yoshihiro Okada Kengo kaneji 
Ryukoku Univ. Ryukoku Univ. 
Seta, Otsu Seta, Otsu 
Shiga, Japan Shiga, Japan 
watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp 
Makoto Nagao 
Kyoto University 
Yoshida, Sakyo-ku 
Kyoto, Japan 
Abstract 
It is important to use pattern information (e.g. TV 
newscasts) and textual information (e.g. newspa
pers) together. For this purpose, we describe a 
method for aligning articles in TV newscasts and 
newspapers. In order to align articles, the align
ment system uses words extracted from telops in 
TV newscasts. The recall and the precision of the 
alignment process are 97% and 89%, respectively. 
In addition, using the results of the alignment pro
cess, we develop a browsing and retrieval system for 
articles in TV newscasts and newspapers. 
1 Introduction

Pattern information and natural language informa
tion used together can complement and reinforce 
each other to enable more effective communication 
than can either medium alone (Feiner 91) (Naka
mura 93). One of the good examples is a TV news
cast and a newspaper. In a TV newscast, events 
are reported clearly and intuitively with speech and 
image information. On the other hand, in a news
paper, the same events are reported by text infor
mation more precisely than in the corresponding 
TV newscast. Figure 1 and Figure 2 are examples 
of articles in TV newscasts and newspapers, respec
tively, and report the same accident, that is, the air
plane crash in which the Commerce Secretary was 
killed. Ilowever, it is difficult to use newspapers and 
TV newscasts together without aligning articles in 
the newspapers with those in the TV newscasts. In 
this paper, we propose a method for aligning arti
cles in newspapers and TV newscasts. In addition, 
we show a browsing and retrieval system for aligned 
articles in newspapers and TV newscasts. 
2 TV
Newscasts and Newspapers 
2.1 TV
Newscasts 
In a TV newscast, events are generally reported in 
the following modalities: 
• image information, 
• speech information, and 
• text information (telops). 
In TV newscasts, the image and the speech infor
mation are main modalities. However, it is diffi
cult to obtain the precise information from these 
kinds of modalities. The text information, on the 
other hand, is a secondary modality in TV news
casts, which gives us: 
• explanations of image information, 
• summaries of speech information, and 
• information which is not concerned with the 
reports (e.g. a time signal). 
In these three types of information, the first and 
second ones represent the contents of the reports. 
Moreover, it is not difficult to extract text infor
mation from TV newscasts. It is because a lots 
of works has been done on character recognition 
and layout analysis (Sakai 93) (Mino 96) (Sato 98). 
Consequently, we use this textual information for 
aligning the TV newscasts with the corresponding 
newspaper articles. The method for extracting the 
textual information is discussed in Section 3.1. But, 
we do not treat the method of character recognition 
in detail, because it is beyond the main subject of 
this study. 
2.2 Newspapers

A text in a newspaper article may be divided into 
four parts: 
• headline, 
• explanation of pictnres, 
• first paragraph, and 
• the rest. 
In a text of a newspaper article, several kinds of 
information are generally given in important order. 
In other words, a headline and a first paragraph in 
a newspaper article give us the most important in
formation. In contrast to this, the rest in a newspa
per article give us the additional information. Con
sequently, headlines and first paragraphs contain 
more significant words (keywords) for representing 
the contents of the article than the rest. 
1381 
Q 
} 
Telops in these TV news images 
top left: 
top right: 
middle left: 
middle right: 
bottom left: 
All the passengers, including 
Commerce Secy Brown, were 
killed 
crush point, the forth day 
[Croatian Minister of Domes
tie Affairs] "All passengers 
were killed" 
[Pentagon] The plane was off 
course. "accident under bad 
weather condition". 
Commerce Secy Brown, Tu
zla, the third day 
Figure 1: An exalnple of TV news articles (NHK evening TV newscasts; April, 4, 1996) 
On the other hand, an explanation of a pictnre in 
an article shows us persons and things in the picture 
that are concerned with the report. For example, in 
Figure 2, texts in bold letters under the picture is 
an explanation of the picture. Consequently, expla
nations of pictures contain many keywords as well 
as headlines and first paragraphs. 
In this way, keywords in a newspaper article are 
distributed unevenly. In other words, keywords are 
more frequently in the headline, the explanation of 
the pictures, and the first paragraph. In addition, 
these kcywords are shared by the newspaper article 
with TV newscasts. For these reasons, we align 
articles in TV newscasts and newspapers using tile 
following clues: 
• location of keywords in each article, 
• frequency of keywords in each article, and 
• length of keywords. 
1382 
~' ~) :,," ;:-'N~N~iI~N~'"o F.,-,'x..# :."~NI, r-~l~-'k 
~-: .... 
tc=n4~-
Summary of this article: On Apr 4, the Croatian Government confirmed that Commerce Secretary 
Ronald tI. Brown and 32 other people were all killed in the crash of a US Air Force plane near the 
Dubrovnik airport in the Balkans on Apt 3, 1996. It was raining hard near the airport at that time. 
A Pentagon st)okesman said there are no signs of terrorist act in this crash. The passengers included 
members of Brown's staff, private business leaders, and a correspondent for the New York Times. 
President Clinton, speaking at the Commerce Department, praised Brown as 'one of the best advisers 
and ablest people I ever knew.' On account of this accident, Vice Secretary Mary Good was appointed 
to the acting Secretary. In the Balkans, three U.S. dficials on a peace mission and two U.S. soldiers 
were killed in Aug 1995 and Jan 1996, respectively. 
(Photo) Commerce Secy Brown got off a military plane Boeing 737 and met soldiers at the Tuzla airport 
in Bosnia. The plane crashed and killed Commerce Secy Brown when it went down to Dubrovnik. 
Figure 2: An example of newspaper articles (Asahi Newspaper; April, 4, 1996) 
3 Aligning
Articles in TV 
Newscasts and Newspapers 
3.1 Extracting
Nouns fi'om Telops 
An article in tile TV newscast generally shares many 
words, especially nouns, with the newspaper article 
which reports the same event. Making use of these 
nouns, we align articles in the TV newscast and in 
the newspaper. For this purpose, we extract nouns 
from the telops as follows: 
Step 1 Extract texts from the TV images by hands. 
For example, we extract "Okinawa ken Ohta 
chifl ~' from the TV image of Figure 3. When 
the text is a title, we describe it. It is not 
difficult to find title texts because they have 
specitic expression patterns, for example, an 
underline (Figure 4 and a top left picture in 
Figure 1). In addition, we describe the follow
Figure 3: An example of texts in a TV newscast: 
"Okinawa ken Ohta chili (Ohta, Governor of Oki
nawa Prefecture)" 
1383 
Figure 4: An example of title texts: "zantei yosaT~an 
asu shu-in lsuka he (The lIouse of Rep. will pass 
the provisional budget tomorrow)" 
ing kinds of information: 
• size of each character 
• distance between characters 
• position of each telop in a TV image 
Step 2 Divide the texts extracted in Step 1 into 
lines. Then, segment these lines at the point 
where the size of character or the distance be
tween characters changes. For example, the 
text in Figure 3 is divided into "Okinawa ken 
(Okinawa Prefecture)", "Ohla (Ohta)", and 
"chiji (Governor)". 
Step 3 Segment the texts by the morphological an
alyzer JUMAN (Kurohashi 97). 
Step 4 Analyze telops in TV images. Figure 5 
shows several kinds of information which are 
explained by telops in TV Newscasts (Watan
abe 96). In (Watanabe 96), a method of se
mantic analysis of telops was proposed and the 
correct recognition of the method was 92 %. 
We use this method and obtain the semantic 
interpretation of each telop. 
Step 5 Extract nouns from the following kinds of 
telops. 
• telops which explain the contents of TV 
images (except "time of photographing" 
and "image data") 
• telops which explain a fact 
It is because these kinds of telops may con
tain adequate words for aligning articles. On 
the contrary, we do not extract nouns from 
the other kinds of telops for aligning articles. 
For example, we do not extract nouns from 
telops which are categorized into a quotation 
of a speech in Step 4. It is because a quota
tion of a speech is used as the additional infor
1. explanation of contents of a TV im
age 
(a) explanation of a scene 
(b) explanation of an element 
i. person 
ii. group and organization 
iii. thing 
(c) bibliographic information 
i. time of photographing 
ii. place of photographing 
iii. image data 
2. quotation of a speech 
3. explanation of a fact 
(a) titles of TV news 
(b) diagram and table 
(c) other 
4. information which is not concerned 
with a report 
(a) current time 
(b) broadcasting style 
(c) names of an announcer and re
porters 
Figure 5: Information explained by telops in TV 
Newscasts 
Figure 6: An example of a quotation of a speech: 
"kono kuni wo zenshin saseru chansu wo atae te 
hoshii (Give me a chance to develop our country)" 
marion and may contain inadequate words for 
aligning articles. Figure 6 shows an example 
of a quotation of a speech. 
3.2 Extraction
of Layout Information in 
Newspaper Articles 
For aligning with articles in TV newscasts, we use 
newspaper articles which are distributed in the In
ternet. The reasons are as follows: 
1384 
Table 1: The weight w(i,j) 
\] newspaper \] 
title \[pict. expl. \[ first par. \[ th .... t 
V tl ..... ~ 4 2 2 i 
the number of the articles in the TV newscasts 143 
the number of the corresponding article pairs 100 
the number of the pairs of aligned articles 109 
the number of the correct pairs of aligned articles 97 
Figure 7: The results of the alignment 
• articles are created in the electronic form, and 
• articles are created by authors using HTML 
which offers embedded codes (tags) to desig
nate headlines, paragraph breaks, and so on. 
Taking advantage of the ttTML tags, we divide 
newspaper articles into four parts: 
• headline, 
• explanation of pictures, 
• first paragraph, and 
• the rest. 
The procedure for dividing a newspaper article is as 
follows. 
1. Extract a headline using tags for headlines. 
2. Divide an article into the paragraphs using 
tags for paragraph breaks. 
3. Extract paragraphs which start " ~\]:~h)> (sha
shin, picture)" as the explanation of pictures. 
4. Extract the top paragraph as the first para
graph. The others are classified into the rest. 
3.3 Procedure
for Aligning Articles 
Before aligning articles in TV newscasts and news
papers, we chose corresponding TV newscasts and 
newspapers. For example, an evening TV newscast 
is aligned with the evening paper of the same day 
and with the morning paper of the next day. We 
aligned articles within these pairs of TV newscasts 
and newspapers. 
The alignment process consists of two steps. First, 
we calculate reliability scores for an article in the 
TV newscasts with each article in the correspond
ing newspapers. Then, we select the newspaper ar
ticle with the maximum reliability score as the cor
responding one. If the maximum score is less than 
the given threshold, the articles are not aligned. 
As mentioned earlier, we calculate the reliability 
scores using these kinds of clue information: 
• location of words in each article, 
• frequency of words in each article, and 
• length of words. 
If we are given a TV news article x and a newspaper 
article y, we obtain the reliability score by using the 
words k(k = 1...N) which are extracted from the 
TV news article x: 
SCORE(x, Y) = 
N 4 2 
w(i,j)fpop  (i,k), fTv(j,k). Z  gth(k) 
k=l i=1 j=l 
where w(i,j) is the weight which is given to accord
ing to the location of word k in each article. We 
fixed the values of w(i,j) as shown in Table 1. As 
shown in Table 1, we divided a newspaper article 
into four parts: (1) title, (2) explanation of pic
tures, (3) first paragraph, and (4) the rest. Also, 
we divided texts in a TV newscasts into two: (1) 
title, and (2) the rest. It is because keywords are 
distributed unevenly in articles of newspapers and 
TV newscasts, fpaper(i,k) and fTv(j,k) are the 
frequencies of the word k in the location i of the 
newspaper and in the location j of the TV news, 
respectively, length(k) is the length of the word k. 
4 Experimental
Results 
To evaluate our approach, we aligned articles in 
the following TV newscasts and newspapers: 
• NHK evening TV newscast, and 
• Asahi newspaper (distributed in the Internet). 
We used 143 articles of the evening TV newscasts 
in this experiment. As mentioned previously, arti
cles in the evening TV newscasts were aligned with 
articles in the evening paper of the same day and 
in the morning paper of the next day. Figure 7 
shows the results of the alignment. In this exper
iment, the threshold was set to 100. We used two 
measures for evaluating the results: recall and pre
cision. The recall and the precision are 97% and 
89~, respectively. 
One cause of the failures is abbreviation of words. 
For example, "shinyo-kinko (credit association)" is 
abbreviated to "shinkin". In our method, these 
words lower the reliability scores. To solve this 
problem, we would like to improve the alignment 
performance by using dynamic programming match
ing method for string matching. (Tsunoda 96) has 
reported that the results of the alignment were im
proved by using dynamic programming matching 
method. 
In this experiment, we did not align the TV news 
articles of sports, weather, stock prices, and foreign 
1385 
• 
Interface Retrieval Database 
~1~[ browser [~ TVnews 
• " i articles 
GUI ~ .................................... J alignment 
~ ............................. ~, ! Informat on 
~l fr;llritexl I~ Ne:rl~2eTr 
-Ii il . I~ f 
~VWW browser 'J ~""CGI script ""'''j HTML document J 
Figure 9: System overview 
Figure 8: An example of a sports news article: "sen
balsu kairnaku (Inter-high school baseball games start)" 
exchange. It is because the styles of these kinds of 
TV news articles are fixed and quite different from 
those of the others. From this, we concluded that 
we had better align these kinds of TV news articles 
by the different method from ours. As a result of 
this, we omitted TV news articles the title text of 
which had the special underline for these kinds of 
TV news articles. For example, Figure 8 shows a 
special underline for a sports news. 
5 Browsing
and Retrieval System 
for Articles in TV Newscasts and 
Newspapers 
The alignment process has a capability for informa
tion retrieval, that is, browsing and retrieving arti
cles in TV newscasts and newspapers. As a result, 
using the results of the alignment process, we devel
oped a browsing and retrieval system for TV news
casts and newspapers. Figure 9 shows the overview 
of the system. The important points for this system 
are as follows: 
• Newspaper articles and TV news articles are 
cross-referenced. 
• A user can consult articles in TV newscasts 
and newspapers by means of the dates of broad
casting or publishing. 
• A user can consult newspaper articles by full 
text retrieval. In the same way, user can con
sult TV newscasts which are aligned with re
trieved newspaper articles. In other words, 
content based retrieval for TV newscasts is 
available. 
• Newspaper articles are written in HTML. In 
addition to this, the results of the alignment 
process are embedded in the HTML texts. As 
a result, we can use a WWW browser (e.g. 
Netscape, Internet Explorer, etc) for brows
ing and retrieving articles in TV newscasts and 
newspapers. 
A user can consult articles in newspapers and TV 
newscasts by full text retrieval in this way: when 
the user gives a query word to the system, the sys
tem shows the titles and the dates of the newspaper 
articles which contain the given word. At the same 
time, the system shows the titles of TV news articles 
which are linked to the retrieved newspaper articles. 
For example, a user obtains 13 newspaper articles 
and 4 TV news articles when he gives "saishutsu 
(annual expenditure)" as a query word to the sys
tem. One of them, entitled "General annual expen
diture dropped for three successive years" (June, 4, 
1997), is shown in Figure 10. The newspaper article 
in Figure 10 has an icon in the above right, looks 
like an opening scene of a TV news article. The 
icons shows this article is linked to the TV news 
article. When the user select this icon, the system 
shows the TV news article "Public work costs were 
a seven percent decrease" (the top left window in 
Figure 10). 

References 

Feiner, McKeown: Automating the Generation of Coor
dinated Multimedia Explanations, IEEE Computer, 
Vol.24 No.10, (1991). 

Nakamura, Furukawa, Nagao: Diagram Understanding 
Utilizing Natural Language Text, 2nd International 
Conference On Document Analysis and Recognition, 
(1993). 

Kurohashi, Nagao: JUMAN Manual version 3.4 tin Japa
nese), Nagao Lab., t(yoto University, (1997) . 
Mino: Intelligent Retrieval for Video Media (in Japanese), 
Journal of Japan Society for Artificial Intelligence 
Vol.ll No.l, (1996).  The source file and the explanation (in Japanese) 
of Japanese morphological analyzer JUMAN can be ob
tained using anonymous FTP from 
ftp://pine.kuee.kyoto-u.ac.jp/pub/juman/juman3.4.tar.gz 

Sakai: A History and Evolution of Document Infor
mation Processing, 2nd International Conference on 
Document Analysis and Recognition, (1993). 

Sato, Hughes, and Kanade: Video OCR for Digital 
News Archive, IEEE International Workshop on Content
based Access of Image and Video Databases, (1998). 

Tsunoda, Ooishi, Watanabe, Nagao: Automatic Align
ment between TV News and Newspaper Articles by 
Maximmn Length String between Captions and Ar
ticle Texts (in Japanese), IPSJ-WGNL 96-NL-115, 
(1996). 

Watanabe, Okada, Nagao: Semantic Analysis of Telops 
in TV Newscasts (in Japanese). IPSJ-WGNL 96 
NL-J16, (1996). 

