The Berkeley FrameNet Project 
Collin F. Baker and Charles J. Fillmore and John B. Lowe {collinb, fillmore, jblowe}~icsi.berkeley.edu 
International Computer Science Institute 
1947 Center St. Suite 600 
Berkeley, Calif., 94704 
Abstract 
FrameNet is a three-year NSF-supported 
project in corpus-based computational lexicog
raphy, now in its second year (NSF IRI-9618838, 
"Tools for Lexicon Building"). The project's 
key features are (a) a commitment to corpus 
evidence for semantic and syntactic generaliza
tions, and (b) the representation of the valences 
of its target words (mostly nouns, adjectives, 
and verbs) in which the semantic portion makes 
use of frame semantics. The resulting database 
will contain (a) descriptions of the semantic 
frames underlying the meanings of the words de
scribed, and (b) the valence representation (se
mantic and syntactic) of several thousand words 
and phrases, each accompanied by (c) a repre
sentative collection of annotated corpus attes
tations, which jointly exemplify the observed 
linkings between "frame elements" and their 
syntactic realizations (e.g. grammatical func
tion, phrase type, and other syntactic traits). 
This report will present the project's goals and 
workflow, and information about the computa
tional tools that have been adapted or created 
in-house for this work. 
1 Introduction

The Berkeley FrameNet project 1 is producing 
frame-semantic descriptions of several thousand 
English lexical items and backing up these de
scriptions with semantically annotated attesta
tions from contemporary English corpora 2. 
1The project is based at the International Computer 
Science Institute (1947 Center Street, Berkeley, CA). A 
fuller bibliography may be found in (Lowe et al., 1997) 
:Our main corpus is the British National Corpus. 
We have access to it through the courtesy of Oxford 
University Press; the POS-tagged and lemmatized ver
sion we use was prepared by the Institut fiir Maschinelle 
Sprachverarbeitung of the University of Stuttgart). The 
These descriptions are based on hand-tagged 
semantic annotations of example sentences ex
tracted from large text corpora and systematic 
analysis of the semantic patterns they exem
plify by lexicographers and linguists. The pri
mary emphasis of the project therefore is the 
encoding, by humans, of semantic knowledge 
in machine-readable form. The intuition of the 
lexicographers is guided by and constrained by 
the results of corpus-based research using high
performance software tools. 
The semantic domains to be covered are: 
HEALTH CARE, CHANCE, PERCEPTION~ COMMU
NICATION, TRANSACTION, TIME~ SPACE, BODY 
(parts and functions of the body), MOTION, LIFE 
STAGES, SOCIAL CONTEXT~ EMOTION and COG
NITION. 
1.1 Scope
of the Project 
The results of the project are (a) a lexical re
source, called the FrameNet database 3, and (b) 
associated software tools. The database has 
three major components (described in more de
tail below: 
• Lexicon containing entries which are com
posed of: (a) some conventional dictionary-type 
data, mainly for the sake of human readers; (b) FOR
MULAS which capture the morphosyntactic ways in 
which elements of the semantic frame can be realized 
within the phrases or sentences built up around the 
word; (c) links to semantically ANNOTATED EXAM
European collaborators whose participation has made 
this possible are Sue Atkins, Oxford University Press, 
and Ulrich HeAd, IMS-Stuttgart. 
aThe database will ultimately contain at least 5,000 
lexical entries together with a parallel annotated cor
pus, these in formats suitable for integration into appli
cations which use other lexical resources such as Word
Net and COMLEX. The final design of the database will 
be selected in consultation with colleagues at Princeton 
(WordNet), ICSI, and IMS, and with other members of 
the NLP community. 
86 
PLE SENTENCES which illustrate each of the poten
tial realization patterns identified in the formula; 4 
and (d) links to the FRAME DATABASE and to other 
machine-readable resources such as WordNet and 
COMLEX. 
• Frame Database containing descriptions of 
each frame's basic conceptual structure and giving 
names and descriptions for the elements which par
ticipate in such structures. Several related entries in 
this database are schematized in Fig. 1. 
• Annotated Example Sentences which are 
marked up to exemplify the semantic and morpho
syntactic properties of the lexical items. (Several 
of these are schematized in Fig. 2). These sentences 
provide empirical support for the lexicographic anal
ysis provided in the frame database and lexicon en
tries. 
These three components form a highly rela
tional and tightly integrated whole: elements 
in each may point to elements in the other 
two. The database will also contain estimates 
of the relative frequency of senses and comple
mentation patterns calculated by matching tile 
senses and patterns in the hand-tagged exam
ples against the entire BNC corpus. 
1.2 Conceptual
Model 
The FrameNet work is in some ways similar 
to efforts to describe the argument structures 
of lexical items in terms of case-roles or theta
roles, 5 but in FrameNet, the role names (called 
frame elements or FEs) are local to particular 
conceptual structures (frames); some of these 
are quite general, while others are specific to a 
small family of lexical items. 
For example, the TRANSPORTATION frame, 
within the domain of MOTION, provides 
MOVERS, MEANS of transportation, and PATHS; 6 
4In cases of accidental gaps, clearly marked invented 
examples may be added. 
~The semantic frames for individual lexical units are 
typically "blends" of more than one basic frame; from 
our point of view, the so-called "linking" patterns pro
posed in LFG, HPSG, and Construction Grammar, op
erate on higher-level frames of action (giving agent, pa
tient, instrument), motion and location (giving theme, 
location, source, goal, path), and experience (giving ex
periencer, stimulus, content), etc. In some but not all 
cases, the assignment of syntactic correlates to frame el
ements could be mediated by mapping them to the roles 
of one of the more abstract frames. 
6A detailed study of motion predicates would require 
a finer-grained analysis of the Path element, separating 
out Source and Goal, and perhaps Direction and Area, 
but for a basic study of the transportation predicates 
such refined analysis is not necessary. In any case, our 
subframes associated with individual words in
herit all of these while possibly adding some of 
their own. Fig. 1 shows some of the subframes, 
as discussed below. 
fr alne (TRA N S P-ORTATIO N) 
frame_elements(MOVER(S), MEANS, PATH) 
scene(MOVER(S) move along PATH by MEANS) 
frame(DRiViNG) 
inherit(TRANSPORTATION) 
frame_elements(DRIVER (=MOVER), VEHICLE 
(=MEANS), RIDER(S) (=MOVER(S)), CARGO 
(=MOVER(S))) 
sceneS(DRIVER starts VEHICLE, DRIVER COn
trois VEHICLE~ DRIVER stops VEHICLE) 
~(RIDfNG_I) 
inherit(TRANSPORTATION) 
frame_elements(RIDER(S) (=MOVER(S)), VE
HICLE (=MEANS)) 
scenes(RIDER enters VEHICLE, 
VEItICLE carries RIDER along PATH, 
RIDER leaves VEHICLE ) 
Figure 1: A subframe can inherit elements and 
semantics from its parent 
The DRIVING frarue, for example, specifies a 
DRIVER (a principal MOVER), 3 VEHICLE (a par
ticularization of tile MEANS element), and po
tentially CARGO or RIDER as secondary movers. 
In this frame, tile DRIVER initiates and controls 
the movement of the VEHICLE. For most verbs 
in this frame, DRIVER or VEHICLE can be real
ized as subjects; VEHICLE, RIDER, or CARGO can 
appear as direct objects; and PATH and VEHICLE 
can appear as oblique complements. 
Some combinations of frame elements, or 
Frame Element Groups (FEGs), for some 
real corpus sentences in the DRIVING frame are 
shown in Fig. 2. 
A RIDING_I frame has the primary mover role 
as RIDER~ and allows as VEHICLE those driven 
by others, z In grammatical realizations of this 
frame, the RIDER can be the subject; the VEHI
CLE can appear as a direct object or an oblique 
complement; and the PATH is generally realized 
as an oblique. 
The PrameNet entry for each of these verbs 
will include a concise formula for all seman
work includes the separate analysis of the frame seman
tics of directional and locational expressions. 
7A separate frame RIDING_2 that applies to the En
glish verb ride selects means of transportation that can 
be straddled, such as bicycles, motorcycles, and horses. 
87 
FEG 
D 
V, D 
D, P 
D, R, P 
D, V, P 
D+R,P 
V, P 
Annotated Example from BNC 
\[D Kate\] drove \[p home\] "in a 
stupor. 
A pregnant womml lost her baby af
ter she fainted as she waited for a 
bus and fell into the path of Iv a 
lorry\] driven \[D by her uncle\]. 
And that was why \[D I\] drove 
\[p eastwards along Lake Geneva\]. 
Now \[D Vail Cheele\] was driving 
\[R his guest\] \[p back to the station\]. \[D 
Cumming\] had a fascination with 
most forms of transport, driving 
\[y his Rolls\] at high speed \[p around 
the streets of London\]. \[D 
We\] drive \[p home along miles 
of empty freeway\]. 
Over the next 4 days, Iv the Rolls 
Royces\] will drive \[p down to Ply
mouth\], following the route of the 
railway. 
Figure 2: Examples of Frame Element Groups 
and Annotated Sentences 
tic and syntactic combinatorial possibilities, to
gether with a collection of annotated corpus sen
tences in which each possibility is exemplified. 
The syntactic positions considered relevant for 
lexicographic description include those that are 
internal to the maximal projection of the target 
word (the whole VP, AP, or NP for target V, A 
or N), and those that are external to the max
imal projection under precise structural condi
tions; the subject, in the case of VP, and the 
subject of support verbs in the case of AP and 
NP. s 
Used in NLP, the FrameNet database should 
make it possible for a system which finds a 
valence-bearing lexical item in a text to know 
(for each of its senses) where its individual argu
ments are likely to be found. For example, once 
a parser has found the verb drive and its direct 
object NP, the link to the DRIVING frame will 
suggest some semantics for that NP, e.g. that 
a person as direct object probably represents 
the RIDER, while a non-human proper noun is 
probably the VEHICLE. 
For practical lexicography, the contribution of 
the FrameNet database will be its presentation 
SFor causatives, the object of the support verb 
is included; for details, see (Fillmore and Atkins, 
forthcoming). 
of the full range of use possibilities for individ
ual words, documented with corpus data, the 
model examples for each use, and the statistical 
information on relative frequency. 
2 Organization
and Workflow 
2.1 Overview

The computational side of the FrameNet project 
is directed at efficiently capturing human in
sights into semantic structure. The majority 
of the work involved is marking text with se
mantle tags, specifying (again by hand) the 
structure of the frames to be treated, and writ
ing dictionary-style entries based the results of 
annotation and a priori descriptions. With 
the exception of the example sentence extrac
tion component, all the software modules are 
highly interactive and have substantial user in
terface requirements. Most of this functionality 
is provided by WWW-based programs written 
in PERL. 
Four processing steps are required produce 
the FrameNet database of frame semantic rep
resentations: (a) generating initial descriptions 
of semantic and syntactic patterns for use in 
corpus queries and annotation ("Preparation"), 
(b) extracting good example sentences ("Sub
corpus Extraction"), (c) marking (by hand) the 
constituents of interest ("Annotation"), and (d) 
building a database of lexical semantic represen
tations based on the annotations and other data 
("Entry Writing"). These are discussed briefly 
below and shown in Fig. 3. 
2.2 Workflow
and Personnel 
As work on the project has progressed, we 
have defined several explicit roles which project 
participants play in the various steps, these 
roles are referred to as Vanguard (1..1 in 
Fig. 3), Annotators (3,1) and Rearguard 
(4.1). These are purely functional designations: 
the same person may play different roles at dif
ferent times. 9 
1. Preparation. The Vanguard (1.1) pre
pares the initial descriptions of frames, includ
ing lists of frames and frame elements, and adds 
these to the Frame Database (5.1) using the 
Frame Description tool (1.2). The Vanguard 
9Of course there are other staff members who write 
code and maintain the databases. This behind-the
scenes work is not shown in Fig. 3. 
88 
Vanguard 1.1 
Annotators 3.1 
e " Y 
___ ""1 ~ / Annotated ~ I Entry 
\[ Sentences If~Writlng 
:--~ ~ \ 5.3 / ~ Tools ~ 4.2 
IT:X~acti°n 2.2 ~ ~k'--z.'~ 
Rearguard 
4,1 
Figure 3: Workflow, Roles, Data Structures and Software 
also selects the major vocabulary items for the 
frame (the target words) and the syntactic pat
terns that need to be checked for each word, 
which are entered in the Lexical Database (5.2) 
by means of the Lexical Database Tool (1.3). 
2. Subcorpus Extraction. Based oil 
the Vanguard's work, the subcorpus extraction 
tools (2.2) produce a representative collection of 
sentences containing these words. 
This selection of examples is achieved through 
a hybrid process partially controlled by the pre
liminary lexical description of each lemma. Sen
tences containing the lemma are extracted from 
from a corpus and classified into subcorpora 
by syntactic pattern (2.2.1) using a CASCADE 
FILTER (2.2.2, 2.2.5, 2.2.6) representing a par
tial regular-expression grammar of English over 
part-of-speech tags (cf. Gahl (forthcoming)), 
formatted for annotation (2.2.4) , and automat
ically sampled (2.2.3) down to an appropriate 
number. 
(If these heuristics fail to find appropriate 
examples by means of syntactic patterns, sen
tences are selected using INTERACTIVE SELEC
TION TOOLS (2.3)). 
3. Annotation. Using the annotation soft
ware (3.2) and the tagsets (3.2.1) derived from 
the Frame Database, the Annotators (3.1) mark 
selected constituents in the extracted subcor
pora according to the frame elements which 
they realize, and identify canonical examples, 
novel patterns, and problem sentences. 1° 
4. Entry Writing. The Rearguard (4.1) 
reviews the skeletal lexical record created by 
the Vanguard, the annotated example sentences 
(5.3), and the FEGs extracted from them, and 
builds both the entries for the lemmas in the 
Lexical Database (5.2) and the frame descrip
tions in the Frame Database (5.1), using the 
Entry Writing Tools (4.2). 
1°We are building a "constituent type identifier" which 
will semi-automatically assign Grammatical Function 
(GF), and Phrase Type (PT) attributes to these FE
marked constituents, eliminating the need for Annota
tors to mark these. 
89 
3 Implementation

3.1 Data
Model 
The data structures described above are im
plemented in SGML. n Each is described by a 
DTD, and these DTDs are structured to provide 
the necessary links between the components. 
3.2 Software

The software suite currently supporting 
database development is an aggregate of 
existing software tools held together with 
PERL/CGI-based "glue". In order to get the 
project started, we have depended on off-the
shelf software which in some cases is not ideal 
for our purposes. Nevertheless, using these 
programs allowed us to get the project up and 
running within just a few months. We describe 
below in approximate order of application the 
programs used and their state of completion. 
• Frame Description Tool (1.2) (in development) 
An interactive, web-based tool. 
• Lexical Description Tool (1.3) (prototype) An 
interactive, web-based tool. 
• CQP (2.2.1) is a high-performance Corpus 
Query Processor, developed at IMS Stuttgart (IMS, 
1997). The cascade filter, which partitions lemma
specific subcorpora by syntactic patterns, is built 
using a preprocessor (written in PERL, 2.2.2) which 
generates CQP's native query language. 
• XKWIC (2.3) is an X-window, interactive tool, 
also from IMS, which facilitates manipulating cor
pora and subcorpora. 
• Subcorpora are prepared for annotation by a 
program ("arf" for Annotation Ready Formatter, 
2.2.4) which wraps SGML tags around sentences, 
target words, comments and other distinguishable 
text elements. Another program, "whittle" (2.2.3), 
combines subcorpora in a preselected order, remov
ing very long and very short sentences, and sampling 
to reduce large subcorpora. 
• Alembic (3.2) (Mitre, 1998), allows the inter
active markup (in SGML) of text files according to 
predefined tagsets (3.2.1). It is used to introduce 
frame element annotations into the subcorpora. 
• Sgmlnorm, etc. (from James Clark's SGML tool 
set) are used to validate and manage the SGML files. 
• Entry Writing Tools (4.2) (in development) 
• Database management tools to manage the cat
alog of subcorpora, schedule the work, render the 
nEventually, we plan to migrate to an XML data 
model, which appears to provide more flexibility while 
reducing complexity. Also, the FrameNet software is be
ing developed on Unix, but we plan to provide cross
platform capabilities by making our tool suite web-based 
and XML-compatible. 
SGML files into HTML for convenient viewing on 
the web, etc. are being written in PERL. RCS main
tains version control over most files. 
4 Conclusion

At the time of writing, there is something in 
place for each of the major software compo
nents, though in some cases these are little more 
than stubs or "toy" implementations. Nearly 
10,000 sentences exemplifying just under 200 
lemmas have been annotated; there are over 
20,000 frame element tokens marked in these 
example sentences. About a dozen frames have 
been specified, which refer to 47 named frame 
elements. Most of these annotations have been 
accomplished in the last few months since the 
software for corpus extraction, frame descrip
tion, and annotation became operational. We 
expect the inventory to increase rapidly. If the 
proportions cited hold constant as the Framenet 
database grows, the final database of 5,000 lex
ical units may contain 250,000 annotated sen
tences and over half a million tokens of frame 
elements. 

References 

Charles J. Fillmore and B. T. S. Atkins. forthcoming. FrameNet and lexicographic relevance. In Proceedings of the First International Conference On Language Resources And Evaluation, Granada, Spain, 28-30 May 1998. 

Susanne Gahl. forthcoming. Automatic extraction of subcorpora based on subcategorization frames from a part of speech tagged corpus. In Proceedings of the 1998 COLING-ACL con\]erence. Institut fiir maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung IMS. 1997. IMS corpus toolbox web page at stuttgart, http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/~oli/CorpusToolbox/. 

John B. Lowe, Collin F. Baker, and Charles J. Fillmore. 1997. A frame-semantic approach to semantic annotation. In Tagging Text with Lexical Semantics: Why, What, and How? Proceedings of the Workshop, pages 18-24. Special Interest Group on the Lexicon~ Association for Computational Linguistics, April. 

Mitre. 1998. Alembic Workbench web page at Mitre corp. http://www.mitre.org/resources/centers/advanced_info/g04h/workbench.html. 

