A concurrent approach to the automatic extraction of 
subsegmental primes and phonological constituents from speech 
Michael INGLEBY 
School of Computing and Mathematics, 
University of Huddersfield, Queensgate, 
Huddersfield HD1 3DH, UK 
M.Ingleby@hud.ac.uk 
Abstract 
We demonstrate the feasibility of using unary primes 
in speech-driven language processing. Proponents of 
Government Phonology (one of several phonological 
frameworks in which speech segments are 
represented as combinations of relatively few 
subsegmental primes) claim that primes are 
acoustically realisable. This claim is examined 
critically searching out signatures for primes in multi
speaker speech signal data. In response to a wide 
variation in the ease of detection of primes, it is 
proposed that the computational approach to 
phonology-based, speech-driven software should be 
organised in stages. After each stage, computational 
processes like segmentation and lexical access can be 
launched to run concurrently with later stages of 
prime detection. 
Introduction and overview 
In § 1, the subsegmental primes and phonological 
constituents used in Government Phonology (GP) are 
described, and the acoustic realisability claims which 
make GP primes seem particularly attractive to 
developers of speech-driven software are 
summarised. We then outline an approach to defining 
identification signatures for primes (§ 2). Our 
approach is based on cluster analysis using a set of 
acoustic cues chosen to reflect familiar events in 
spectrograms: plosion, frication, excitation, 
resonance... We note that cues indicating manner of 
articulation, which change abruptly at segment 
boundaries, are computationally simple, while those 
for voicing state and resonance quality are complex 
and calculable only after signal segmentation. Also, 
Wiebke BROCKHAUS 
Department of German, 
University of Manchester, 
Oxford Rd, Manchester M 13 9PL, 
UK 
Wiebke.Brockhaus@man.ac.uk 
the regions of cue space where the primes cluster (and 
which serve as their signatures) are disconnected, 
with separate sub-regions corresponding to the 
occurrence of a prime in nuclear or non-nuclear 
segmental positions. 
A further complication is that GP primes o3mbine 
asymmetrically in segments: one prime the HEAD 
of the combination being more dominant, while the 
other element(s) the OPERATORS(S) tend to be 
recessive. This is handled by establishing in cue space 
a central location and within-cluster variance for each 
prime. The training sample needed for this consists of 
segments in which the prime suffers modification 
only by minimal combination with others, i.e on its 
own, or with as few other primes as possible. Then, 
when a segment containing the prime in less than 
minimal combination is presented for identification, 
its location in cue space lies within a restricted 
number of units of within-cluster variance of the 
central location of the prime cluster. The number of 
such distance units determines headedness in the 
segment, with separate thresholds for occurrence as 
head and as operator. 
In § 3 we describe in more detail the stagewise 
procedure for identifying via quadratic discriminants 
the primes present in segments. At each stage, we 
detail the computational processes which are driven 
by the partial identification achieved by theend of the 
stage. The processes include segmentation, selection 
of lexical cohort by manner class, detection of 
constituent structure, detection and repair of the 
effects of phonological processes on the speech 
signal. The prototype, speaker-independent, isolated
word automatic speech recognition (ASR) system is 
described in § 4. Called 'PhonMaster', it is 
578 
implemented in C++ using objects which perform 
separate stages of lexical access and process repair 
concurrently. 
1 Phonological
primes and constituents 
Much of the phonological research work of tile past 
twenty years has focussed on phonological 
representations: on the make-up of individual 
segments and on the prosodic hierarchy binding 
skeletal positions together. 
Some researchers (e.g. Anderson and Ewen 1987 
and Kaye et al. 1985) have proposed a small set of 
subsegmental primes which may occur in isolation 
but can also be compounded to model the many 
phonologically significant sounds of the world's 
languages. To give an example, in one version of GP 
(see Brockhaus et al. 1996), nine primes or EI,EMENTS 
are recognised, viz. the manner elements h (noise) 
and ? (occlusion), the source elements H 
(voicelessness), L (non-spontaneous voicing) and N 
(nasality), and the resonance elements A (low), I 
(palatal), U (labial) and R (coronal). These elements 
are phonologically active they can spread to 
neighbouring segments, be lenited etc.. 
The skeletal positions to which elements may be 
attached (alone or in combination) enter into 
asymmetric binary relations with each other, so-called 
GOVERNING relations. A CONSTITUENT is defined as 
an ordered pair, governor first on the left and 
governee second on the right. Words are composed of 
well-formed sequences of constituents. Which 
skeletal positions may enter into governing relations 
with each other is mainly determined by the elements 
which occupy a particular skeletal slot, so elemental 
make-up is an important factor in the construction of 
phonological constituents. 
GP proponents have claimed that elements, which 
were originally described in articulatory terms, have 
audible acoustic identities. As we shall see in § 2, it is 
possible to define the acoustic signatures of individual 
elements, so that the presence of an element can be 
detected by analysis of the speech signal. 
Picking out elements from the signal is much 
more straightforward than identifying phonemes. 
Firstly, elements are subject to less variation due the 
contextual effects (e.g. place assimilation) of 
preceding and following segments than phonemes. 
Secondly, elements are much smaller in number than 
phonemes (nine elements compared to c. 44 
phonemes in English) and, thirdly, elements, unlike 
phonemes, have been shown to participate in the kind 
of phonological processes which lead to variation in 
pronunciation (see references in Harris 1994). 
Fourthly, although there is much variation of 
phoneme inventory from language to language, the 
element inventory is universal. 
These four characteristics of its elements, plus the 
availability of reliable element detection, make a 
phonological framework such as GP a highly 
attractive basis for multi-speaker speech-driven 
software. This includes not only traditional ASR 
applications (e.g. dictation, database access), but also 
embraces multilingual speech input, medical (speech 
therapy) and teaching (computer-assisted language 
learning) applications. 
2 Signatures
ofGP clemcnts 
Table 1 below details the acoustic cues used in 
PhonMaster. Using training data from five speakers, 
male and female, synthetic and real with different 
regional accents, these cues discriminate between the 
simplest speech segments containing an element in a 
minimal combination with others. In the case of a 
resonance element, say, U, the minimal state of 
combination corresponds to isolated occurrence in a 
vowel such as \[\[J\], as in RP English hood or German 
Bus. 
The accuracy of cues such as those in Table 1 for 
discrimination of simplest speech segments has been 
tested by different researchers using ratios of within~ 
class to between-class variance~covariance and 
dendrograms (Brockhaus et al. 1996, Williams 1997), 
as described in PhonMaster's documentation. 
The cues are calculated from fast Fourier 
transforms (FFTs) of speech signals in terms of total 
amplitude or energy distribution ED across low, 
middle and high frequency parts of the vocal range 
and the angular frequencies o(F) and amplitudes a(F) 
of formants. The first four cues dp~ to d~ are 
properties of a single spectral slice, and the change in 
these four from slice to slice is logged as qbs, which 
peaks at segment boundaries. The duration cue ~6 is 
segment-based, computable only after segmentation 
from tile length in slices from boundary to boundary, 
579 
normalising this length using the JSRU database of 
the relative durations of segments in different manner 
classes (see Chalfont 97). The normalisation is a 
simple form of time-warping without the 
computational complexity of dynamic time-warping 
or Hidden Markov Models (HMMs). 
Cue Label Definition 
0;~ Energy 0;1 -= EDIo / EDhi 
ratioj 
0;2 Energy 
ratio2 
0;3 Width 
;4 
0;5 
;6 
;7 
0;2 ~EDmid / EDhi 
0;3 -(¢0(F2) to(F 1)) / 
(co(F3) to(F2)) 
Fall 0;4 -= a(F1) /(a(F3)+a(F2)) 
Change !If 60; : 0;next-slice -0;currenbs\[ice, 
0;, -= 60;, + 60;2 + 6003 +60;4 
Duration 0;6 operates with reference 
to a durations database 
F1 0;7 -~ o3(F 1)bo.nd/~o(F 1 )steady 
Trajectory 
0;8 Formant 
Transition 
If A0; = 0;steady 0;bound, 
0;8 
( (F2)steady  (Fl)steady) 
Table 1. Cues used to define signatures 
The other segment-based cues contrast steady
state formant values at the centre of a segment with 
values at entrance and exit boundary. They describe 
the context of a segment without going to the 
computational complexity of triphone HMMs (e.g. 
Young 1996). The PhonMaster approach is not tied 
to a particular set of cues, so long as the members of 
the set are concerned with ratios which vary much 
less from speaker to speaker than absolute 
frequencies and intensities. Nor is the approach 
bound to FFTs linear predictive coding would 
extract energy density and formants just as well. 
Signatures are defined from cues by locating in 
cue space cluster centres and defining a quadratic 
discriminant based on the variance-covariance 
matrix of the cluster. When elements occur in higher 
degrees of combination than those selected for the 
training sample, separate detection thresholds for 
distance from cluster centre are set for occurrence as 
head and occurrence as operator. 
3 Stagewise
element recognition 
The detection of elements in the signal proceeds in 
three stages, with concurrent processes (lexical 
access, phonological process repair...) being 
launched after each stage and before the full identity 
of a segment has been established. 
The overall architecture of the recognition task is 
shown in Figure 1. At Stage 1, the recogniser checks 
for the presence of the manner elements h and ?. 
|, Mtlltt 
2. rhoaatloa 
H 
Figure 1. Stagewise cue invocation strategy 
This launches the calculation of cues 0;5 (for the 
automatic segmentation process) and 0;6 (to 
distinguish vowels from approximants, and to 
determine vowel length). The ensuing manner class 
assignment process produces the classes: 
Occ Occlusion (i.e. ? present as head, as in 
plosives and affricates) 
Sfr Strong fricative (i.e. h present as head, as 
in \[s\], \[z\], \[S\] and \[Z\]) 
Wfr Weak fricative (i.e. h present as operator, 
as in plosives and non-sibilant fricatives) 
580 
Plo 
Ntis 
App 
Svo 
LVo 
Vow 
Plosion (as for Wfr, but interpreted as 
plosion when directly following Occ 
except word-initially) 
Nasal (i.e. ? present as operator) 
Approximant 
Short vowel 
Long vowel or diphthong 
Vowel (not readily identifiable as being 
either long or short). 
the words can be identified uniquely by manner class 
alone. This is the case for languages such as English, 
German, French and Italian, so the accessing of an 
individual word may be successful as early as Stage 
I, and no further data processing need be carried out. 
If, however, as in Figure 3, the manner-class 
sequence identified is a common one, shared by 
several words, then the recognition process moves 
Figure 2. Representation of potential after Stage 1 
As soon as such a sequence of manner classes 
becomes available, repair processes and lexical 
searches can be launched concurrently. The repair 
object refers to the constituent structure which can 
be built on the basis of manner-class information 
alone and checks its conformance to the universal 
principles of grammar in GP as well as to language
specific constraints. In cases of conflict with either, 
a new structure is created to resolve the conflict 
For example, the word potential is often realised 
without a vowel between the first two consonants. 
This elided vowel would be restored automatically 
by lhe repair object, as illustraled in Figure 2, where 
a nuclear position (N) has been inserted between the 
two onset (O) positions occupied by the plosives. 
Constituent structure is less specific than manner 
classes (in certain cases, different manner-class 
sequences are assigned the same constituent 
structure), so maturer classes form the key for lexical 
access at Stage 1. Zue (1985) reports that, even in a 
large lexicon of c. 20, 000 words, around a third of 
Figure 3. Lexicai search screen for a common manner 
class sequence (Stage 1) 
on to Stage 2, where the phonatory properties of the 
segments identified at Stage 1 are determined. 
Continuing with the example in Figure 3, the 
lexical access object would now discard words such 
as seed or shade, as neither of them contains the 
element H (voicelessness in obstruents), whose 
presence has been detected in both the initial 
fricative and the final plosive at Stage 2. Again, it 
may be possible to identil~¢ a unique word candidate 
at the end of Stage 2, but if several candidates are 
available, recognition moves on to Stage 3. 
Here, the focus is on the four resonance 
elements. As the manifestations of U, R, ! and A 
vary between voiced vs. voiceless obstruents vs. 
sonorants, appropriate cues are invoked for each of 
these three broad classes (some of the cues reusing 
information gathered at Stage 1). The detection of 
certain resonance elements then provides all the 
necessary information for a final iexical search. In 
our example, only one word, seep, contains all the 
elements detected at Stages 1 to 3, as illustrated in 
581 
Figure 4. Only in cases of homophony will more 
than one word be accessed at Stage 3. 
Figure 4. Lexical search screen for a common manner 
class sequence (Stage 3) 
Concurrently with this lexical search, repair 
processes check for the effects of assimilation, 
allowing for adjacent segments (especially in 
clusters involving nasals and plosives)to share one 
or more resonance elements, thus resolving possible 
access problems arising from words such as input 
/'lrlpUt/being realised as \['ImpUt\]. 
4 PhonMaster
and its successors 
The PhonMaster prototype was implemented in C++ 
by a PhD student educated in object-oriented design 
and Windows application programming. It uses 
standard object-class libraries for screen 
management, standard relational database tools for 
control of the lexicon and standard code for FFT as 
in a spectrogram display object. Users may add 
words using a keypad labelled with IPA symbols. 
Manner class sequences and constituent structure are 
generated automatically. The objects concerned wilh 
the extraction of cues from spectra, segmentation, 
manner-class sequencing and display of constituent 
structure, repairing effects of lenition and 
assimilation are custom built. 
PhonMaster does not use corpus trigram statistics 
(e.g. Young 1996) to disambiguate word lattices, and 
there is no speaker-adaptation. Without these 
standard ways of enhancing pure pattern-recognition 
accuracy, its success rate for pure word recognition 
is around 75%. We are contemplating the addition of 
pitch cues, which, with duration, would allow 
detection of stress, which may further increase 
accuracy. 
Object orientation makes the task of 
incorporating currently popular pattern recognition 
methods fairly straightforward. HMMs whose 
hidden states have cues like ours as observables are 
obvious things to try. ArtificialNeural Nets (ANNs) 
also fit into the task architecture in various places. 
Vector quantisation ANNs could be used to learn the 
best choice of thresholds for head-operator detection 
and discrimination. ANNs with output nodes based 
on our quadratic discriminants in place of the more 
common linear discriminants are also an option, and 
their output node strengths would be direct measures 
of presence of elements. 

References 

Anderson J.M. and Ewen C.J. (1987) Principles of 
Dependency Phonology. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, England, 312 pp. 

Brockhaus W.G., Ingleby M. and Chalfont C.R. 
(1996) Acoustic signatures of phonological 
primes. Internal report. Universities of 
Manchester and Huddersfield, England. 

Chalfont C.R. (1997) University of Huddersfield 
PhD Dissertation 'Automatic Speech Recogni
tion: a Government Phonology perspective' 

Harris J. (1994) English Sound Structure. Blackwell, 
Oxford, England. 

Kaye J.D., Lowenstamm J. and Vergnaud J.-R. 
(1985) The internal structure of phonological 
elements: a theory of charm and government. 
Phonology Yearbook, 2, pp. 305-328. 

Williams G. (1997) A pattern recognition model for 
the phonetic interpretation of elements. SOAS 
Working Papers in Linguistics and Phonetics, 7, 
pp. 275-297. 

Young S. (1997) A Review of Large-vocabulary 
Continuous-speech Recognition. IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine, September Issue. 

Zue V.W. (1985) The use of speech knowledge in 
Automatic Speech Recognition, Proc. ICASSP, 
73/11, pp. 1602-1615. 

