Multilingual Term Extraction from Domain-specific Corpora Using Morphological Structure Delphine Bernhard TIMC-IMAG Institut de l’Ing´enierie et de l’Information de Sant´e Facult´e de M´edecine F-38706 LA TRONCHE cedex Delphine.Bernhard@imag.fr Abstract Morphologically complex terms composed from Greek or Latin elements are frequent in scientific and technical texts.
Word forming units are thus relevant cues for the identification of terms in domainspecific texts.
This article describes a method for the automatic extraction of terms relying on the detection of classical prefixes and word-initial combining forms.
Word-forming units are identified using a regular expression.
The system then extracts terms by selecting words which either begin or coalesce with these elements.
Next, terms are grouped in families which are displayed as a weighted list in HTML format.
1 Introduction
Many methods for the automatic extraction of termsmakeuseofpatternsdescribingthestructure of terms.
This approach is especially helpful for multi-word terms.
Depending on the method, patterns rely on morpho-syntactic properties (Daille, 1996; Ibekwe-SanJuan, 1998), the co-occurrence of terms and connectors (Enguehard, 1992; Baroni and Bernardini, 2004) or the alternation of informative and non-informative words (Vergne, 2005).
These patterns use words as basic units and thus apply to multi-word terms.
Methods for the acquisition of single-word terms generally depend on frequency-related information.
For instance, the frequency of occurrence of a word in a domain-specific corpus can be compared with its frequency of occurrence in a reference corpus (Rayson and Garside, 2000; Baroni and Bernardini, 2004).
Technical words usually have a high relative frequency difference between the domainspecific corpus and the reference corpus.
In this paper, we present a pattern-based technique to extract single-word terms.
In technical and scientific domains like medicine many terms are derivatives or neoclassical compounds (Cottez, 1984).
There are several types of classical word-forming units: prefixes (extra-, anti-), initial combining forms (hydro-, pharmaco-), suffixes (-ism) and final combining forms (-graphy, -logy).
Interestingly, these units are rather constant in many European languages (Namer, 2005).
Consequently, insteadofrelyingonasubworddictionary to analyse compounds like (Schulz et al., 2002), our method makes use of these regularities to automatically extract prefixes and initial combining forms from corpora.
The system then identifies terms by selecting words which either begin or coalesce with these units.
Moreover, forming elements are used to group terms in morphological and hence semantic families.
The different stages of the process are detailed in section 2.
Section 3 describes the results of experiments performed on four corpora, in English and in French.
2 Description
of the method 2.1 Extraction of words The system takes as input a corpus of texts.
Paragraphs written in another language than the target language are filtered out.
Texts are then tokenised and words are converted to lowercase.
Besides, words containing digits or other non-word characters are eliminated.
However, hyphenated words are kept since hyphens mark morpheme boundaries.
This preliminary step produces a word frequency list for the corpus.
171 2.2 Acquisition of combining forms Prefixes and initial combining forms are automatically acquired using the following regular expression: ([aio]-)?(\w3,}[aio])-.
This regular expression represents character strings whose length is higher or equal to 4, ending with a, i or o and immediately followed by a hyphen.
The first part of the regular expression accounts for words where several prefixes or combining forms follow one another (as for instance in the French word “h´epato-gastro-ent´erologues”).
This regular expression applies to English but also to other languages like French or German: see for instance “chimio-radioth´erapie” in French, “chemo-radiotherapy” in English or “Chemoradiotherapie” in German.
2.3 Identification
of terms Terms are identified using the following pattern describing their morphological structure: E+W where E is a prefix or combining form and W is a wordwhoselengthishigherthan3; the‘+’character represents the possible succession of several E elements at the beginning of a term.
Prefixes and combining forms may be separated by a hyphen.
When this pattern applies to one of the words in the corpus, two terms are recognised, one with a E+W structure and the other with a W structure.
For instance, given the word “ferrobasalts”, the system identifies the terms “ferrobasalts” (E+W) and “basalts” (W).
2.4 Conflation
of terms Term variants are grouped in order to ease the analysis of results.
The method for terms conflation can be decomposed in two stages: 1.
Terms containing the same word W belong to the same family, represented by the word W.
For instance, both “chemotherapy” and “radiotherapy” contain the word “therapy”: they belong to the same family of terms, represented by the word “therapy”.
2. Two families are merged if they are represented by words sharing the same initial substring (with a minimum initial substring length of 4) and if the same prefix or combining form occurs in one term of each family.
Consider for instance the families F1= [oncology, psycho-oncology, radiooncology, neuro-oncology, psychooncology, neurooncology] and F2 = [oncologist, neurooncologist].
The terms representing F1 (“oncology”) and F2 (“oncologist”) share an initial substring of length 7.
Moreover the terms “neuro-oncology” from F1 and “neurooncologist” from F2 contain the combining form “neuro”.
Families F1 and F2 are therefore united.
When terms have been conflated, we select the most frequent term as a family’s representative.
2.5 Data
visualisation The results obtained are displayed as a weighted list in HTML format.
Such lists, also named “heat maps” or “tag clouds” when they describe tags1 usually represent the terms and topics which appear most frequently on websites or RSS feeds (Wikipedia, 2006).
They can also be used to represent any kind of word list (V´eronis, 2005).
Different colours and font sizes are used depending on the word’s frequency of occurrence.
We have adapted this method to visualise the list of extracted terms.
Since several hundred terms may be extracted, only the terms representing a family are displayed on the weighted list.
Weight is given by the cumulated frequency of all the terms belonging to the family (see Figure 1).
Figure 1: Term cloud example (Corpus: BC en) Further information (terms and frequencies) is displayed thanks to tooltips (see Figure 2), using the JavaScript overLIB libray ( http://www.
bosrup.com/web/overlib). 1See for example TagCloud: http://www.
tagcloud.com 172 Figure 2: Detailed term family displayed as a tooltip (Corpus: V fr) 3 Experiments and results 3.1 Corpora The system has been experimented on 4 corpora covering the domains of volcanology (V) and breast cancer (BC), in English (en) and in French (fr).
The corpora have been automatically built from the web, using the methodology described in (Baroni and Bernardini, 2004), via the Yahoo!
Search Web Services ( http://developer.
yahoo.net/search/). The size of the corpora obtained are given in Table 1.
This table also gives the number of key words, i.e., single-word terms extracted by comparing the frequency of occurrence of words in both corpora for each language (Rayson and Garside, 2000).
Only terms with a log-likelihood of 3.8 or higher (p<0.05) have been kept in the key words list.
Table 2 gives a numerical overview of the results obtained by our method.
Corpus Tokens Word forms Key words BC fr 1,451,809 46,834 13,700 BC en 7,044,146 88,726 17,602 V fr 1,777,030 59,909 13,673 V en 2,929,591 48,257 19,641 Table 1: Size of the corpora 3.2 Prefixes and initial combining forms As shown by Table 2, the number of prefixes and initial combining forms identified is proportionally less for the volcanology corpora both in English and in French.
Medical corpora seem to be more adapted to the method since the numCorpus Word-forming elements Terms Term families BC fr 334 4,248 911 BC en 382 5,444 1,338 V fr 182 1,842 583 V en 188 1,648 564 Table2: Numberofword-formingelements, terms and term families identified for each corpus ber of terms extracted is higher.
The prefixes and combining forms identified are also highly dependent on the corpus domain.
For instance, amongst the most frequent combining forms extracted for the BC corpora, we find “radio” and “chemo” (“chimio” in French) and for the V corpora, “strato” and “volcano”.
3.3 Terms
The overlap percentage between the list of terms and the list of key words ranges from 38.65% (V fr) to 56.92% (V en) of the total amount of terms extracted.
If we compare both the list of key words and the list of terms extracted for the BC en corpus with the Unified Medical Language System Metathesaurus (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ research/umls/) we notice that some highly specific terms like “disease”, “blood” or “x-ray” are not identified by our method, while they occur in the key words list.
These are usually morphologically simple terms, also used in everyday language.
Conversely, terms with low frequency like “adenoacanthoma”, “chondroma” or “mammotomy” are correctly identified by the patternbased approach but are missing in the key words list.
Both methods are therefore complementary.
In some cases, stop-words are extracted.
This is a side effect of the pattern used to retrieve terms.
Remember that terms are words which coalesce with combining forms, possibly with hyphenation.
In English hyphens are sometimes mistakenly used instead of the dash to mark comment clauses.
Consider for instance the following sentence: “As this magma-which drives one of the worlds largest volcanic systems-rises, it pushes up the Earths crust beneath the Yellowstone Plateau.”.
Here “magma” is identified as a combining form since it ends with ‘a’ and is directly followed by a hyphen.
Consequently, “which” is wrongly identified as a term.
173 3.4 Term families Several types of term variants are grouped by the termconflationalgorithm: (a)graphicalandorthographical variants like “tumour” (British variant) and “tumor” (American variant); (b) inflectional variants like “tumor” and “tumors”; (c) derivational variants like “tumor” and “tumoral”.
Two types of conflation errors may however occur: over-conflation, i.e., the conflation of terms which do not belong to the same morphological family and under-conflation, i.e. the absence of conflation for morphologically related terms.
Some cases of over-conflation are obvious, such as the grouping of “significant” with “cant”.
In some other cases it is more difficult to tell.
This especially applies to the conflation of terms composed of word final combining forms like “-gram” or “-graph”.
Under-conflation occurs when no combining form is shared between terms belonging to families represented by graphically similar terms.
For instance, the following term families are extracted from the French volcanology corpus (V fr): F1= [basalte, m´etabasalte, m´eta-basalte], F2= [basaltes, ferro-basaltes, pal´eobasaltes] and F3= [basaltique, and´esitico-basaltique].
These families are not conflated, even though they obviously belong to the same morphological family.
4 Conclusion
We have presented a method for the automatic acquisition of terms from domain-specific texts using morphological structure.
The method also groups terms in morphological families.
Families are displayed as a weighted list, thus giving an instant overview of the main topics in the corpus under study.
Results obtained from the first experiments confirm the usefulness of a morphological pattern based approach for the extraction of terms from domain-specific corpora and especially medical texts.
The method for the identification of compound words could be improved by an automatic approach to morphological segmentation as done by (Creutz and Lagus, 2004).
Term clustering could be ameliorated as well by investigating the usefulness of stemming to avoid underconflation.
References Marco Baroni and Silvia Bernardini.
2004. BootCaT: Bootstrapping Corpora and Terms from the Web.
In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pages 1313–1316.
Henri Cottez.
1984. Dictionnaire des structures du vocabulaire savant.
´El´ements et mod`eles de formation.
Le Robert, Paris, 3rd edition.
Mathias Creutz and Krista Lagus.
2004. Induction of a Simple Morphology for Highly-Inflecting Languages.
In Proceedings of the 7th Meeting of the ACL Special Interest Group in Computational Phonology (SIGPHON), pages 43–51.
B´eatrice Daille.
1996. Study and Implementation of Combined Techniques for Automatic Extraction of Terminology.
In Judith Klavans and Philip Resnik, editors, The Balancing Act: Combining Symbolic and Statistical Approaches to Language, pages 49– 66.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Chantal Enguehard.
1992. ANA, Apprentissage Naturel Automatique d’un R´eseau S´emantique.
Ph.D. thesis, Universit´e de Technologie de Compi`egne.
Fidelia Ibekwe-SanJuan.
1998. Terminological variation, a means of identifying research topics from texts.
In Proceedings of the Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLINGACL’98), pages 564–570.
Fiammetta Namer.
2005. Morphos´emantique pour l’appariement de termes dans le vocabulaire m´edical : approche multilingue.
In Actes de TALN 2005, pages 63–72.
Paul Rayson and Roger Garside.
2000. Comparing Corpora using Frequency Profiling.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Comparing Corpora, pages 1–6.
Stefan Schulz, Martin Honeck, and Udo Hahn.
2002. Biomedical Text Retrieval in Languages with a Complex Morphology.
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Natural Language Processing in the Biomedical Domain, pages 61–68.
Jacques Vergne.
2005. Une m´ethode ind´ependante des langues pour indexer les documents de l’internet par extraction de termes de structure contrˆol´ee.
In Actes de la Conf´erence Internationale sur le Document ´Electronique (CIDE 8), pages 155–168.
Jean V´eronis.
2005. Nuage de mots d’aujourd’hui.
http://aixtal.blogspot.com/2005/07/ lexique-nuage-de-mots-daujourdhui.
html. [Online; accessed 31-January-2006].
Wikipedia. 2006.
RSS (file format) — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
http: //en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title= RSS_(file_format)&oldid=37472136.
[Online; accessed 31-January-2006]. 174

