Using Encyclopedic Knowledge for Named Entity Disambiguation Razvan BunescuA3 Department of Computer Sciences University of Texas at Austin Austin, TX 78712-0233 razvan@cs.utexas.edu Marius Pas¸ca Google Inc.
1600 Amphitheatre Parkway Mountain View, CA 94043 mars@google.com Abstract We present a new method for detecting and disambiguating named entities in open domain text.
A disambiguation SVM kernel is trained to exploit the high coverage and rich structure of the knowledge encoded in an online encyclopedia.
The resulting model significantly outperforms a less informed baseline.
1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation The de-facto web search paradigm defines the result to a user’s query as roughly a set of links to the best-matching documents selected out of billions of items available.
Whenever the queries search for pinpointed, factual information, the burden of filling the gap between the output granularity (whole documents) and the targeted information (a set of sentences or relevant phrases) stays with the users, by browsing the returned documents in order to find the actually relevant bits of information.
A frequent case are queries about named entities, which constitute a significant fraction of popular web queries according to search engine logs.
When submitting queries such as John Williams or Python, search engine users could also be presented with a compilation of facts and specific attributes about those named entities, rather than a set of best-matching web pages.
One of the challenges in creating such an alternative search result page is the inherent ambiguity of the queries, as several instances of the same class (e.g., different people) or different classes (e.g., a type of snake, a programming language, or a movie) may share the same name in the query.
As an example, the A3Work done during a summer internship at Google.
contexts below are part of web documents referring to different people who share the same name John Williams: 1.
“John Williams and the Boston Pops conducted a summer Star Wars concert at Tanglewood.” 2.
“John Williams lost a Taipei death match against his brother, Axl Rotten.” 3.
“John Williams won a Victoria Cross for his actions at the battle of Rorke‘s Drift.” The effectiveness of the search could be greatly improved if the search results were grouped together according to the corresponding sense, rather than presented as a flat, sense-mixed list of items (whether links to full-length documents, or extracted facts).
As an added benefit, users would have easier access to a wider variety of results, whenever the top 10 or so results returned by the largest search engines happen to refer to only one particular (arguably the most popular) sense of the query (e.g., the programming language in the case of Python), thus submerging or “hiding” documents that refer to other senses of the query.
In various natural language applications, significant performance gains are achieved as a function of data size rather than algorithm complexity, as illustrated by the increasingly popular use of the web as a (very large) corpus (Dale, 2003).
It seems therefore natural to try to exploit the web in order to also improve the performance of relation extraction, i.e. the discovery of useful relationships between named entities mentioned in text documents.
However, if one wants to combine evidence from multiple web pages, then one needs again to solve the name disambiguation problem.
9 Without
solving it, a relation extraction system analyzing the sentences in the above example could mistakenly consider the third as evidence that John Williams the composer fought at Rorke’s Drift.
1.2 Approach
The main goal of the research reported in this paper is to develop a named entity disambiguation method that is intrinsically linked to a dictionary mapping proper names to their possible named entitiy denotations.
More exactly, the method: 1.
Detects whether a proper name refers to a named entity included in the dictionary (detection).
2. Disambiguates between multiple named entities that can be denoted by the same proper name (disambiguation).
As a departure from the methodology of previous approaches, the paper exploits a non-traditional web-based resource.
Concretely, it takes advantage of some of the human knowledge available in Wikipedia, a free online encyclopedia created through decentralized, collective efforts of thousands of users (Remy, 2002).
We show that the structure of Wikipedia lends itself to a set of useful features for the detection and disambiguation of named entities.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section 2 describes Wikipedia, with an emphasis on the features that are most important to the entity disambiguation task.
Section 3 describes the extraction of named entity entries (versus other types of entries) from Wikipedia.
Section 4 introduces two disambiguation methods, which are evaluated experimentally in Section 5.
We conclude with future work and conclusions.
2 Wikipedia
– A Wiki Encyclopedia Wikipedia is a free online encyclopedia written collaboratively by volunteers, using a wiki software that allows almost anyone to add and change articles.
It is a multilingual resource there are about 200 language editions with varying levels of coverage.
Wikipedia is a very dynamic and quickly growing resource – articles about newsworthy events are often added within days of their occurrence.
As an example, the September 2005 version contains 751,666 articles, around 180,000 more articles than four months earlier.
The work in this paper is based on the English version from May 2005, which contains 577,860 articles.
Each article in Wikipedia is uniquely identified by its title – a sequence of words separated by underscores, with the first word always capitalized.
Typically, the title is the most common name for the entity described in the article.
When the name is ambiguous, it is further qualified with a parenthetical expression.
For instance, the article on John Williams the composer has the title John Williams (composer).
Because each article describes a specific entity or concept, the remainder of the paper sometimes uses the term ’entity’ interchangeably to refer to both the article and the corresponding entity.
Also, let BX denote the entire set of entities from Wikipedia.
For any entity CTBEBX, CTBMD8CXD8D0CT is the title name of the corresponding article, and CTBMCC is the text of the article.
In general, there is a many-to-many correspondence between names and entities.
This relation is captured in Wikipedia through redirect and disambiguation pages, as described in the next two sections.
2.1 Redirect
Pages A redirect page exists for each alternative name that can be used to refer to an entity in Wikipedia.
The name is transformed (using underscores for spaces) into a title whose article contains a redirect link to the actual article for that entity.
For example, John Towner Williams is the full name of the composer John Williams.
It is therefore an alternative name for the composer, and consequently the article with the title John Towner Williams is just a pointer to the article for John Williams (composer).
An example entry with a considerably higher number of redirect pages is United States.
Its redirect pages correspond to acronyms (U.S.A., U.S., USA, US), Spanish translations (Los Estados Unidos, Estados Unidos), misspellings (Untied States) or synonyms (Yankee land).
For any given Wikipedia entity CTBEBX, let CTBMCA be the set of all names that redirect to CT.
2.2 Disambiguation
Pages Another useful structure is that of disambiguation pages, which are created for ambiguous names, i.e. names that denote two or more entities in Wikipedia.
For example, the disambiguation page for the name John Williams lists 22 associated 10 TITLE REDIRECT DISAMBIG CATEGORIES Star Wars music,...
John Williams (composer) John Towner Williams John Williams Film score composers, 20th century classical composers John Williams (wrestler) Ian Rotten John Williams Professional wrestlers, People living in Baltimore John Williams (VC) none John Williams British Army soldiers, British Victoria Cross recipients Boston Pops Orchestra Boston Pops, Pops American orchestras, The Boston Pops Orchestra Massachusetts musicians United States US, USA, ...
US, USA, North American countries, United States of America United States Republics, United States Venus, Venus Venus (planet) Planet Venus Morning Star, Planets of the Solar System, Evening Star Planets, Solar System, ...
Table 1: Examples of Wikipedia titles, aliases and categories entities.
Therefore, besides the non-ambiguous names that come from redirect pages, additional aliases can be found by looking for all disambiguation pages that list a particular Wikipedia entity.
In his philosophical article “On Sense and Reference” (Frege, 1999), Gottlob Frege gave a famous argument to show that sense and reference are distinct.
In his example, the planet Venus may be referred to using the phrases “morning star” and “evening star”.
This theoretical example is nicely captured in practice in Wikipedia by two disambiguation pages, Morning Star and Evening Star, both listing Venus as a potential referent.
For any given Wikipedia entity CT BE BX, let CTBMBW be the set of names whose disambiguation pages contain a link to CT.
2.3 Categories
Every article in Wikipedia is required to have at least one category.
As shown in Table 1, John Williams (composer) is associated with a set of categories, among them Star Wars music, Film score composers, and 20th century classical composers.
Categories allow articles to be placed into one or more topics.
These topics can be further categorized by associating them with one or more parent categories.
In Table 1 Venus is shown as both an article title and a category.
As a category, it has one direct parent Planets of the Solar System, which in turn belongs to two more general categories, Planets and Solar System.
Thus, categories form a directed acyclic graph, allowing multiple categorization schemes to co-exist simultaneously.
There are in total 59,759 categories in Wikipedia.
For a given Wikipedia entity CTBEBX, let CTBMBV be the set of categories to which CT belongs (i.e.
CT’s immediate categories and all their ancestors in the Wikipedia taxonomy).
2.4 Hyperlinks
Articles in Wikipedia often contain mentions of entities that already have a corresponding article.
When contributing authors mention an existing Wikipedia entity inside an article, they are required to link at least its first mention to the corresponding article, by using links or piped links.
Both types of links are exemplified in the following wiki source code of a sentence from the article on Italy: “The [[Vatican City|Vatican]] is now an independent enclave surrounded by [[Rome]]”.
The string from the second link (“Rome”) denotes the title of the referenced article.
The same string is also used in the display version.
If the author wants another string displayed (e.g., “Vatican” instead of “VaticanCity”), then the alternative string is included in a piped link, after the title string.
Consequently, the display string for the aforementioned example is: “The Vatican is now an independent enclave surrounded by Rome”.
As described later in Section 4, the hyperlinks can provide useful training examples for a named entity disambiguator.
3 A
Dictionary of Named Entities We organize all named entities from Wikipedia into a dictionary structure BW, where each string entry CS BE BW is mapped to the set of entities CSBMBX that can be denoted by CS in Wikipedia.
The first step is to identify named entities, i.e. entities with a proper name title.
Because every title in Wikipedia must begin with a capital letter, the decision whether a title is a proper name relies on the following sequence of heuristic steps: 11 1.
If CTBMD8CXD8D0CT is a multiword title, check the capitalization of all content words, i.e. words other than prepositions, determiners, conjunctions, relative pronouns or negations.
Consider CT a named entity if and only if all content words are capitalized.
2. If CTBMD8CXD8D0CT is a one word title that contains at least two capital letters, then CT is a named entity.
Otherwise, go to step 3.
3. Count how many times CTBMD8CXD8D0CT occurs in the text of the article, in positions other than at the beginning of sentences.
If at least BJBHB1 of these occurrences are capitalized, then CT is a named entity.
The combined heuristics extract close to half a million named entities from Wikipedia.
The second step constructs the actual dictionary BW as follows: AF The set of entries in BW consists of all strings that may denote a named entity, i.e. if CTBEBX is a named entity, then its title name CTBMD8CXD8D0CT, its redirect names CTBMCA, and its disambiguation names CTBMBW are all added as entries in BW.
AF Each entry string CSBEBW is mapped to CSBMBX, the set of entities that CS may denote in Wikipedia.
Consequently, a named entity CT is included in CSBMBX if and only if CS BP CTBMD8CXD8D0CT, CS BE CTBMCA, or CSBECTBMBW.
4 Named
Entity Disambiguation As illustrated in Section 1, the same proper name may refer to more than one named entity.
The named entity dictionary from Section 3 and the hyperlinks from Wikipedia articles provide a dataset of disambiguated occurrences of proper names, as described in the following.
As shown in Section 2.4, each link contains the title name of an entity, and the proper name (the display string) used to refer to it.
We use the term query to denote the occurrence of a proper name inside a Wikipedia article.
If there is a dictionary entry matching the proper name in the query D5 such that the set of denoted entities D5BMBX contains at least two entities, one of them the true answer entity D5BMCT, then the query D5 is included in the dataset.
More exactly, if D5BMBX contains D2 named entities CT BD, CT BE, ..., CT D2, then the dataset will be augmented with D2 pairs CWD5BNCT CZ CX represented as follows: CWD5BNCT CZ CX BP CJÆB4CT CZ BND5BMCTB5 CY D5BMCC CY CT CZ BMD8CXD8D0CTCL The field D5BMCC contains all words occurring in a limit length window centered on the proper name.
The window size is set to 55, which is the value that was observed to give optimum performance in the related task of cross-document coreference (Gooi and Allan, 2004).
The Kronecker delta function ÆB4CT CZ BND5BMCTB5 is 1 when CT CZ is the same as the entity D5BMCT referred in the link.
Table 2 lists the query pairs created for the three John Williams queries from Section 1.1, assuming only three entities in Wikipedia correspond to this name.
Æ Query Text Entity Title 1 Boston Pops conduct ...
John Williams (composer) 0 Boston Pops conduct ...
John Williams (wrestler) 0 Boston Pops conduct ...
John Williams (VC) 1 lost Taipei match ...
John Williams (wrestler) 0 lost Taipei match ...
John Williams (composer) 0 lost Taipei match ...
John Williams (VC) 1 won Victoria Cross ...
John Williams (VC) 0 won Victoria Cross ...
John Williams (composer) 0 won Victoria Cross ...
John Williams (wrestler) Table 2: Disambiguation dataset.
The application of this procedure on Wikipedia results into a dataset of 1,783,868 disambiguated queries.
4.1 Context-Article Similarity Using the representation from the previous section, the name entity disambiguation problem can be cast as a ranking problem.
Assuming that an appropriate scoring function D7CRD3D6CTB4D5BNCT CZ B5 is available, the named entity corresponding to query D5 is defined to be the one with the highest score: CMCT BP CPD6CVD1CPDC CT CZ D7CRD3D6CTB4D5BNCT CZ B5 (1) If CMCT BP D5BMCT then CMCT represents a hit, otherwise CMCT is a miss.
Disambiguation methods will then differ based on the way they define the scoring function.
One ranking function that is evaluated experimentally in this paper is based on the cosine similarity between the context of the query and the text of the article: D7CRD3D6CTB4D5BNCT CZ B5 BP CRD3D7B4D5BMCCBNCT CZ BMCCB5 BP D5BMCC CZD5BMCCCZ CT CZ BMCC CZCT CZ BMCCCZ The factors D5BMCC and CT CZ BMCC are represented in the standard vector space model, where each component corresponds to a term in the vocabulary, and the term weight is the standard D8CU A2 CXCSCU score (Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999).
The vocabulary CE is created by reading all Wikipedia 12 articles and recording, for each word stem DB, its document frequency CSCUB4DBB5 in Wikipedia.
Stopwords and words that are too frequent or too rare are discarded.
A generic document CS is then represented as a vector of length CYCE CY, with a position for each vocabulary word.
If CUB4DBB5 is the frequency of word DB in document CS, and C6 is the total number of Wikipedia articles, then the weight of word DBBECE in the D8CU A2 CXCSCU representation of CS is: CS DB BP CUB4DBB5D0D2 C6 CSCUB4DBB5 (2) 4.2 Taxonomy Kernel An error analysis of the cosine-based ranking method reveals that, in many cases, the pair CWD5BNCTCX fails to rank first, even though words from the query context unambiguously indicate CT as the actual denoted entity.
In these cases, cue words from the context do not appear in CT’s article due to two main reasons: 1.
The article may be too short or incomplete.
2. Even though the article captures most of the relevant concepts expressed in the query context, it does this by employing synonymous words or phrases.
The cosine similarity between D5 and CT CZ can be seen as an expression of the total degree of correlation between words from the context of query D5 and a given named entity CT CZ . When the correlation is too low because the Wikipedia article for named entity CT CZ does not contain all words that are relevant to CT CZ, it is worth considering the correlation between context words and the categories to which CT CZ belongs.
For illustration, consider the two queries for the name John Williams from Figure 1.
To avoid clutter, Figure 1 depicts only two entities with the name JohnWilliams in Wikipedia: the composer and the wrestler.
On top of each entity, the figure shows one of their Wikipedia categories (Film score composers and Professional wrestlers respectively), together with some of their ancestor categories in the Wikipedia taxonomy.
The two query contexts are shown at the bottom of the figure.
In the context on the left, words such as conducted and concert denote concepts that are highly correlated with the Musicians, Composers and Filmscore composers categories.
On the other hand, their correlation with other categories in Figure 1 is considerably lower.
Consequently, a Musicians Composers Film score composers People by occupation People People known in connection with sports and hobbies Wrestlers Professional wrestlers high correlationshigh correlations ? ? conducted a summer Star Wars John Williams John Williams a Taipei death lost concert match[...] [...] John Williams (composer) John Williams (wrestler) Figure 1: Word-Category correlations.
goal of this paper is to design a disambiguation method that 1) learns the magnitude of these correlations, and 2) uses these correlations in a scoring function, together with the cosine similarity.
Our intuition is that, given the query context on the left, such a ranking function has a better chance of ranking the “composer” entity higher than the “wrestler” entity, when compared with the simple cosine similarity baseline.
We consider using a linear ranking function as follows: CMCT BP CPD6CVD1CPDC CT CZ DB A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5 (3) The feature vector A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5 contains a dedicated feature AU CRD3D7 for cosine similarity, and CYCE CY A2 CYBVCY features AU DBBNCR corresponding to combinations of words DB from the Wikipedia vocabulary CE and categories CR from the Wikipedia taxonomy BV: AU CRD3D7 B4D5BNCT CZ B5 BP CRD3D7B4D5BMCCBNCT CZ BMCCB5 (4) AU DBBNCR B4D5BNCT CZ B5 BP AQ BD if DBBED5BMCC and CRBECT CZ BMBVBN BC otherwiseBM The weight vector DB models the magnitude of each word-category correlation, and can be learned by training on the query dataset described at the beginning of Section 4.
We used the kernel version of the large-margin ranking approach from (Joachims, 2002) which solves the optimization 13 problem in Figure 2.
The aim of this formulation is to find a weight vector DB such that 1) the number of ranking constraints DB A8B4D5BND5BMCTB5 AL DB A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5 from the training data that are violated is minimized, and 2) the ranking function DB A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5 generalizes well beyond the training data.
minimize: CEB4DBBNAOB5 BP BD BE DBA1DBB7BV C8 AO D5BNCZ subject to: DBB4A8B4D5BND5BMCTB5 A0A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5B5 AL BDA0 AO D5BNCZ AO D5BNCZ AL BC BKD5BNBKCT CZ BE D5BMBX A0 CUD5BMCTCV Figure 2: Optimization problem.
BV is a parameter that allows trading-off margin size against training error.
The number of linear ranking constraints is C8 D5 B4CYD5BMBXCY A0BDB5.
As an example, each of the three queries from Table 2 generates two constraints.
The learned DB is a linear combination of the feature vectors A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5, which makes it possible to use kernels (Vapnik, 1998).
It is straightforward to show that the dot product between two feature vectors A8B4D5BNCT CZ B5 and A8B4D5 BC BNCT BC CZ B5 is equal with the product between the number of common words in the contexts of the two queries and the number of categories common to the two named entities, plus the product of the two cosine similarities.
The corresponding ranking kernel is: C3 A0 CWD5BNCT CZ CXBNCWD5 BC BNCT BC CZ CX A1 BP AC AC D5BMCC CK D5 BC BMCC AC AC A1 AC AC CT CZ BMBV CK CT BC CZ BMBV AC AC B7 CRD3D7B4D5BMCCBNCT CZ BMCCB5 A1 CRD3D7B4D5 BC BMCCBNCT BC CZ BMCCB5 To avoid numerical problems, the first term of the kernel is normalized and the second term is multiplied with a constant AB BP BDBCBK: C3 A0 CWD5BNCT CZ CXBNCWD5 BC BNCT BC CZ CX A1 BP CYD5BMCC CK D5 BC BMCCCY D4 CYD5BMCCCY A1 CYD5 BC BMCCCY A1 CYCT CZ BMBV CK CT BC CZ BMBVCY D4 CYCT CZ BMBVCY A1 CYCT BC CZ BMBVCY B7 AB A1 CRD3D7B4D5BMCCBNCT CZ BMCCB5 A1 CRD3D7B4D5 BC BMCCBNCT BC CZ BMCCB5 In (McCallum et al., 1998), a statistical technique called shrinkage is used in order to improve the accuracy of a naive Bayes text classifier.
Accordingly, one can take advantage of a hierarchy of classes by combining parameter estimates of parent categories into the parameter estimates of a child category.
The taxonomy kernel is very related to the same technique – one can actually regard it as a distribution-free analogue of shrinkage.
4.3 Detecting
Out-of-Wikipedia Entities The two disambiguation methods discussed above (Sections 4.1 and 4.2) implicitly assume that Wikipedia contains all entities that may be denoted by entries from the named entity dictionary.
Taking for example the name John Williams, both methods assume that in any context, the referred entity is among the 22 entities listed on the disambiguation page in Wikipedia.
In practice, there may be contexts where John Williams refers to an entity CT D3D9D8 that is not covered in Wikipedia, especially when CT D3D9D8 is not a popular entity.
These out-of-Wikipedia entities are accommodated in the ranking approach to disambiguation as follows.
A special entity CT D3D9D8 is introduced to denote any entity not covered by Wikipedia.
Its attributes are set to null values (e.g., the article text CT D3D9D8 BMCC BP BN, and the set of categories CT D3D9D8 BMBV BP BN).
The ranking in Equation 1 is then updated so that it returns the Wikipedia entity with the highest score, if this score is greater then a fix threshold AS, otherwise it returns CT D3D9D8 : CT D1CPDC BP CPD6CVD1CPDC CT CZ D7CRD3D6CTB4D5BNCT CZ B5 CMCT BP AQ CT D1CPDC if D7CRD3D6CTB4D5BNCT D1CPDC B5 BQ ASBN CT D3D9D8 otherwiseBM If the scoring function is implemented as a weighted combination of feature functions, as in Equation 3, then the modification shown above results into a new feature AU D3D9D8 : AU D3D9D8 B4D5BNCT CZ B5 BP ÆB4CT CZ BNCT D3D9D8 B5 (5) The associated weight AS is learned along with the weights for the other features (as defined in Equation 5).
5 Experimental
Evaluation The taxonomy kernel was trained using the SVMD0CXCVCWD8 package (Joachims, 1999).
As described in Section 4, through its hyperlinks, Wikipedia provides a dataset of 1,783,868 ambiguous queries that can be used for training a named entity disambiguator.
The apparently high number of queries actually corresponds to a moderate size dataset, given that the space of parameters includes one parameter for each word-category combination.
However, assuming SVMD0CXCVCWD8 does not run out of memory, using the entire dataset for training and testing is extremely 14 TRAINING DATASET TEST DATASET # CAT.
QUERIES PAIRS CWD5BNCT CZ CX # CONSTR.
QUERIES PAIRS CWD5BNCT CZ CX # SV TK(A) Cos(A) CB BD 110 12,288 39,880 27,592 48,661 147,165 19,693 77.2% 61.5% CB BE 540 17,970 55,452 37,482 70,468 235,290 29,148 68.4% 55.8 % CB BF 2,847 21,185 64,560 43,375 75,190 261,723 36,383 68.0% 55.4% CB BG 540 38,726 102,553 63,827 80,386 191,227 35,494 84.8% 82.3% Table 3: Scenario statistics and comparative evaluation.
time consuming.
Therefore, we decided to evaluate the taxonomy kernel under the following scenarios: A4 [CB BD ] The working set of Wikipedia categories BV BD is restricted to only the 110 top level categories under People by occupation.
The query dataset used for training and testing is reduced to contain only ambiguous queries CWD5BNCT CZ CX for which any potential matching entity CT CZ belongs to at least one of the 110 categories (i.e.
CT CZ BMBV CK BV BD BIBP BN).
The set of negative matching entities CT CZ is also reduced to those that differ from the true answer CT in terms of their categories from BV BD (i.e.
CT CZ BMBV CK BV BD BIBP CTBMBV CKBV BD ).
In other words, this scenario addresses the task of disambiguating between entities with different top-level categories under People by occupation.
A4 [CB BE ] In a slight generalization of [CB BD ], the set of categories BV BE is restricted to all categories under People by occupation.
Each category must have at least 200 articles to be retained,which results in a total of 540 categories out of the 8202 categories under People by occupation.
The query dataset is generated as in the first scenario by replacing BV BD with BV BE . A4 [CB BF ] This scenario is similar with [CB BE ], except that each category has to contain at least 20 articles to be retained, leading to 2847 out of 8202 categories.
A4 [CB BG ] This scenario uses the same categories as [CB BE ] (i.e.
BV BG BPBV BE ).
In order to make the task more realistic, all queries from the initial Wikipedia dataset are considered as follows.
For each query D5, out of all matching entities that do not have a category under People by occupation, one is randomly selected as an out-of-Wikipedia entity.
Then, out of all queries for which the true answer is an out-of-Wikipedia entity, a subset is randomly selected such that, in the end, the number of queries with out-of-Wikipedia true answers is BDBCB1 of the total number of queries.
In other words, the scenario assumes the task is to detect if a name denotes an entity belonging to the People by occupation taxonomy and, in the positive cases, to disambiguate between multiple entities under People by occupation that have the same name.
The dataset for each scenario is split into a training dataset and a testing dataset which are disjoint in terms of the query names used in their examples.
For instance, if a query for the name John Williams is included in the training dataset, then all other queries with this name are allocated for learning (and consequently excluded from testing).
Using a disjoint split is motivated by the fact that many Wikipedia queries that have the same true answer also have similar contexts, containing rare words that are highly correlated, almost exclusively, with the answer.
For example, query names that refer to singers often contain album or song names, query names that refer to writers often contain book names, etc.
The taxonomy kernel can easily “memorize” these associations, especially when the categories are very fine-grained.
In the current framework, the unsupervised method of context-article similarity does not utilize the correlations present in the training data.
Therefore, for the sake of comparison, we decided to prohibit the taxonomy kernel from using these correlations by training and testing on a disjoint split.
Section 6 describes how the training queries could be used in the computation of the context-article similarity, which has the potential of boosting the accuracy for both disambiguation methods.
Table 3 shows a number of relevant statistics for each scenario: #CAT represents the number of Wikipedia categories, #SV is the number of support vectors, TK(A) and Cos(A) are the accuracy of the Taxonomy Kernel and the Cosine similarity respectively.
The training and testing datasets are characterized in terms of the number of queries and query-answer pairs.
The number of ranking contraints (as specified in Figure 2) is also included for the training data in column #CONSTR.
The size of the training data is limited so that learning in each scenario takes within three days on a Pentium 4 CPU at 2.6 GHz.
Furthermore, 15 in CB BG, the termination error criterion AF is changed from its default value of BCBMBCBCBD to BCBMBCBD.
Also, the threshold AS for detecting out-of-Wikipedia entities when ranking with cosine similarity is set to the value that gives highest accuracy on training data.
As can be seen in the last two columns, the Taxonomy Kernel significantly outperforms the Cosine similarity in the first three scenarios, confirming our intuition that correlations between words from the query context and categories from Wikipedia taxonomy provide useful information for disambiguating named entities.
In the last scenario, which combines detection and disambiguation, the gain is not that substantial.
Most queries in the corresponding dataset have only two possible answers, one of them an out-of-Wikipedia answer, and for these cases the cosine is already doing well at disambiguation.
We conjecture that a more significant impact would be observed if the dataset queries were more ambiguous.
6 Future
Work The high number of support vectors – half the number of query-answer pairs in training data – suggests that all scenarios can benefit from more training data.
One method for making this feasible is to use the weight vector DB explicitely in a linear SVM.
Because much of the computation time is spent on evaluating the decision function, using DB explicitely may result in a significant speed-up.
The dimensionality of DB (by default CYCE CY A2 CYBVCY) can be reduced significantly by considering only word-category pairs whose frequency in the training data is above a predefined threshold.
A complementary way of using the training data is to augment the article of each named entity with the contexts from all queries for which this entity is the true answer.
This method has the potential of improving the accuracy of both methods when the training and testing datasets are not disjoint in terms of the proper names used in their queries.
Word-category correlations have been used in (Ciaramita et al., 2003) to improve word sense disambiguation (WSD), although with less substantial gains.
There, a separate model was learned for each of the 29 ambiguous nouns from the Senseval 2 lexical sample task.
While creating a separate model for each named entity is not feasible – there are 94,875 titles under People by occupation – named entity disambiguation can nevertheless benefit from correlations between Wikipedia categories and features traditionally used in WSD such as bigrams and trigrams centered on the proper name occurrence, and syntactic information.
7 Conclusion
We have presented a novel approach to named entity detection and disambiguation that exploited the untapped potential of an online encyclopedia.
Experimental results show that using the Wikipedia taxonomy leads to a substantial improvement in accuracy.
The application of the new named entity disambiguation method holds the promise of better results to popular web searches.
8 Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Peter Dienes, Thorsten Joachims, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
References Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto.
1999. Modern Information Retrieval.
ACM Press, New York.
Massimiliano Ciaramita, Thomas Hofmann, and Mark Johnson.
2003. Hierarchical semantic classification: Word sense disambiguation with world knowledge.
In The 18th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Acapulco, Mexico.
Robert Dale.
2003. Computational linguistics.
Special Issue on the Web as a Corpus, 29(3), September.
Gottlob Frege.
1999. On sense and reference.
In Maria Baghramian, editor, Modern Philosophy of Language, pages 3–25.
Counterpoint Press.
Chung Heong Gooi and James Allan.
2004. Cross-document coreference on a large scale corpus.
In Proceedings ofHuman Language Technology Conference / North American Association for Computational Linguistics Annual Meeting, Boston, MA.
Thorsten Joachims.
1999. Making large-scale SVM learning practical.
In B.
Sch¨olkopf, C.
J. C.
Burges, and A.
J. Smola, editors, Advances in Kernel Methods Support Vector Learning, pages 169–184.
MIT Press.
Thorsten Joachims.
2002. Optimizing search engines using clickthrough data.
In Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 133–142.
Andrew McCallum, R.
Rosenfeld, Tom Mitchell, and A.
Y. Ng.
1998. Improving text classification by shrinkage in a hierarchy of classes.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-98), pages 359–367, Madison, WI.
M. Remy.
2002. Wikipedia: The free encyclopedia.
Online Information Review, 26(6):434.
www.wikipedia.org. Vladimir N.
Vapnik. 1998.
Statistical Learning Theory.
John Wiley & Sons. 16

