POS tagger combinations on Hungarian text Andr as Kuba, L aszl o Felf oldi, Andr as Kocsor Research Group on Arti cial Intelligence, University of Szeged, Aradi vrt.
1, H-6720, Hungary fakuba, lfelfold, kocsorg@inf.u-szeged.hu Abstract In this paper we will brie y survey the key results achieved so far in Hungarian POS tagging and show how classi er combination techniques can aid the POS taggers.
Methods are evaluated on a manually annotated corpus containing 1.2 million words.
POS tagger tests were performed on single-domain, multiple domain and cross-domain test settings, and, to improve the accuracy of the taggers, various combination rules were implemented.
The results indicate that combination schemas (like the Boosting algorithm) are promising tools which can signi cantly degrade the classication errors, and produce a more e ective tagger application.
1 Introduction
an related works Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is perhaps one of the most basic tasks in natural language processing.
In this paper we will review the current state-of-the-art in Hungarian POS tagging, and investigate the possibilities of improving the results of the taggers by applying classi er combination techniques.
We used a Transformation Based Learner (TBL) as the base tagger for combination experiments, and the learner algorithm determines the set of applicable combination schemes.
From this set we chose two algorithms called Bagging and Adaboost.M1.
In the next subsection, the most important published results of the last few years in Hungarian POS tagging are summarized.
The TBL tagger is described in detail in Section 2, then the corpora and the data sets we used for our investigations are presented in Section ??.
The classi er combination and details about the implementation of this technique are described in Section 3.
After the results of the boosted tagger are presented in Section 4.
Lastly, some conclusions about the e ectiveness and e ciency of our boosting approach are made in the nal section.
1.1 POS
Tagging of Hungarian Texts Standard POS tagging methods were applied to Hungarian as soon as the rst annotated corpora appeared that were big enough to serve as a training database for various methods.
The TELRI corpus (Dimitrova et al., 1998) was the rst corpus that was used for testing di erent POS tagging methods.
This corpus contains approximately 80; 000 words.
Later, as the Hungarian National Corpus (V aradi, 2002) and the Manually Annotated Hungarian Corpus (the Szeged Corpus) (Alexin et al., 2003) became available, an opportunity was provided to test the results on bigger corpora (153M and 1.2M words, respectively).
In recent years several authors have published many useful POS tagging results in Hungarian.
It is generally believed that, ow191 ing to the fairly free word order and the agglutinative property of the Hungarian language, there are more special problems associated with Hungarian than those of the Indo-European languages.
However, the latest results are comparable to results achieved in English and other well-studied languages.
Fruitful approaches for Hungarian POS tagging are Hidden Markov Models, Transformation Based Learning and rule-based learning methods.
One of the most common POS tagging approaches is to build a tagger based on Hidden Markov Models (HMM).
Tu s (Tu s et al., 2000) reported good results with the Trigrams and Tags (TnT) tagger (Brants, 2000).
A slightly better version of TnT was employed by Oravecz (Oravecz and Dienes, 2002), and it achieved excellent results.
In their paper, Oravecz and Dienes (Oravecz and Dienes, 2002) argue that regardless of the rich morphology and relatively free word order, the POS tagging of Hungarian with HMM methods is possible and e ective once one is able to handle the data sparsity problem.
They used a modi ed version of TnT that was supported by an external morphological analyzer.
In this way the trigram tagger was able to make better guesses about the unseen words and therefore to get better results.
An example of the results achieved by this trigram tagger is presented in the rst row of Table 1.
Another approach besides the statistical methods is the rule-based learning one.
A valuable feature of the rule-based methods is that the rules these methods work with are usually more intelligible to humans than the parameters of statistical methods.
For Hungarian, a few such approaches are available in the literature.
In a comprehensive investigation, Horv ath et al.(Horv ath et al., 1999) applied ve di erent machine learning methods to Hungarian POS tagging.
They tested C4.5, PHM, RIBL, Progol and AGLEARN (Alexin et al., 1999) methods on the TELRI corpus.
The results of C4.5 and the best tagger found in this investigation (RIBL) are presented in the second and third rows of Table 1.
Tagger Accuracy TnT + Morph.
Ana. 98.11% C4.5 97.60% Best method (RIBL) 98.03% RGLearn 97.32% TBL 91.94% TBL + Morph.
Ana. 96.52% Best combination 96.95% Table 1: Results achieved by various Hungarian POS taggers.
H ocza (H ocza et al., 2003) used a di erent rule generalization method called RGLearn.
Row 4 shows the test results of that tagger in Table 1.
Transformation Based Learning is a rule-based method that we will discuss in depth in Section 2.
Megyesi (Megyesi, 1999) and Kuba et al.(Kuba et al., 2004) produced results with TBL taggers that are given in Table 1, in rows 5 and 6, respectively.
Kuba et al.(Kuba et al., 2004) performed experiments with combinations of various tagger methods.
The combinations outperformed their component taggers in almost every case.
However, in the di erent test sets, di erent combinations proved the best, so no conclusion could be drawn about the best combination.
The combined tagger that performed best on the largest test set is shown in row 7 of Table 1.
2 The
TBL tagger Transformation Based Learning (TBL) was introduced by Brill (Brill, 1995) for the task of POS tagging.
Brill’s implementation consists of two processing steps.
In the rst step, a lexical tagger calculates the POS tags based on lexical information only (word forms).
The result of the lexical tagger is used as a rst guess in the second run where both the word forms and the actual POS tags are applied by the contextual tagger.
Both lexical and contextual taggers make use of the TBL concept.
During training, TBL performs a greedy search in a rule space in order to nd the rules that best improve the correctness of the cur192 rent tagging.
The rule space contains rules that change the POS tag of some words according to their environments.
From these rules, an ordered list is created.
In the tagging phase, the rules on the rule list are applied one after another in the same order as the rule list.
After the last rule is applied, the current tag sequence is returned as a result.
For the Hungarian language, Megyesi applied this technique initially with moderate success.
(Megyesi, 1998) The weak part of her rst implementation was the lexical module of the tagger, as described in (Megyesi, 1999).
With the use of extended lexical templates, TBL produced a much better performance but still lagged behind the statistical taggers.
We chose a di erent approach that is similar to (Kuba et al., 2004).
The rst guess of the TBL tagger is the result of the baseline tagger.
For the second run, the contextual tagger implementation we used is based on the fnTBL learner module.
(Ngai and Florian, 2001) We used the standard parameter settings included in the fnTBL package.
2.1 Baseline
Tagger The baseline tagger relies on an external morphological analyzer1 to get the list of possible POS tags.
If the word occurs in the training data, the word gets its most frequent POS tag in the training.
If the word does not appear in the training, but representatives of its ambiguity class (words with the same possible POS tags) are present, then the most frequent tag of all these words will be selected.
Otherwise, the word gets the rst tag from the list of possible POS tags.
Some results produced by the baseline tagger and the improvements achieved by the TBL tagger are given in Table 2.
3 Classi
er Combinations The goal of designing pattern recognition systems is to achieve the best possible classi cation performance for the speci ed task.
This objective traditionally led to the development 1We used the Humor (Pr osz eky, 1995) analyzer developed by MorphoLogic Ltd.
Test Domain Baseline TBL full corpus 94.94% 96.52% business news 97.56% 98.26% cross-domain 79.51% 95.79% Table 2: Accuracy of the baseline tagger and the TBL tagger.
of di erent classi cation schemes for recognition problems the user would like solved.
Experiments shows that although one of the designs should yield the best performance, the sets of patterns misclassi ed by the di erent classi ers do not necessarily overlap.
These observations motivated the relatively recent interest in combining classi ers.
The main idea behind it is not to rely on the decision of a single classi er.
Rather, all of the inducers or their subsets are employed for decisionmaking by combining their individual opinions to produce a nal decision.
3.1 Bagging
The Bagging (Bootstrap aggregating) algorithm (Breiman, 1996) applies majority voting (Sum Rule) to aggregate the classi ers generated by di erent bootstrap samples.
A bootstrap sample is generated by uniformly sampling m instances from the training set with replacement.
T bootstrap samples B1; B2; :::; BT are generated and a classi er Ci is built from each bootstrap sample Bi.
Bagging algorithm Require: Training Set S = fx1; : : :;xmg Ensure: Combined classi er ^C for i = 1 : : :T do S0 = bootstrap sample from S Train classifer Ci on S0 end for ^C(x) = argmax j X i I[Ci(x) = !j] For a given bootstrap sample, an instance in the training set will have a probability 1 (1 1=m)m of being selected at least once from the m instances that are randomly picked from the training set.
For large m, 193 this is about 1-1/e = 63.2%.
This perturbation causes di erent classi ers to be built if the inducer is unstable (e.g.
ANNs, decision trees) and the performance may improve if the induced classi ers are uncorrelated.
However, Bagging can slightly degrade the performance of stable algorithms (e.g.
kNN) since e ectively smaller training sets are used for training.
3.2 Boosting
Boosting (Freund and Schapire, 1996) was introduced by Shapire as a method for improving the performance of a weak learning algorithm.
AdaBoost changes the weights of the training instances provided as input for each inducer based on classi ers that were previously built.
The nal decision is made using a weighted majority voting schema for each classi er, whose weights depend on the performance of the training set used to build it.
Adaboost algorithm Require: Training Set S = fx1; : : :;xmg Ensure: Combined classi er ^C d(1)j = 1=N for all j = 1 : : :m for t = 1 : : :T do Train classi er Ct with respect to the distribution d(t).
Calculate the weighted training error t of Ct: t = mX j=1 d(t)j I[Ct(xj) 6= !j] if t > 1=2 then Exit Set t: t = 12log1 t t d(t+1)j = d(t+1)j 1Z t e tI[Ct(x)6=!j], where Zt is the normalization constant, such that: mX j=1 d(t+1)j = 1 end for ^C(x) = argmax j X t tI[Ct(x) = !j] The boosting algorithm requires a weak learning algorithm whose error is bounded by a constant strictly less than 1/2.
In the case of multi-class classi cations this condition might be di cult to guarantee, and various techniques may need to be applied to get round this restriction.
There is an important issue that relates to the construction of weak learners.
At step t the weak learner is constructed based on the weighting dt.
Basically, there are two approaches for taking this weighting into account.
In the rst approach we assume that the learning algorithm can operate with reweighted examples.
For instance, when the learner minimizes a cost function, one can construct a revised cost function which assigns weights to each of the examples.
However, not all learners can be easily adapted to such an inclusion of the weights.
The other approach is based on resampling the data with replacement.
This approach is more general as it is applicable to all kinds of learners.
4 Boosted
results for TBL TBL belongs to the group of learners that generates abstract information, i.e. only the class label of the source instance.
Although it is possible to transcribe the output format to con dence type, this limitation degrades the range of the applicable combination schemes.
Min, Max and Prod Rules cannot produce a competitive classi er ensemble, while Sum Rule and Borda Count are equivalent to majority voting.
From the set of available boosting algorithms we may only apply those methods that do not require the modi cation of the learner.
For the experiments we chose Bagging and a modi ed Adaboost.M1 algorithm as boosting.
Since the learner is incapable of handling instance weights, individual training datasets were generated by bootstrapping (i.e.
resamping with replacement).
The original Adaboost.M1 algorithm requires that the weighted error should be below 50%.
In this case the modi ed algorithm reinitializes the instance weights and goes on with the processing.
The Boosting algorithm is based on weighting the independent instances based on the classi cation error of the previously trained 194 0 20 40 60 80 1001 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 number of classifiers classification error [%] Recognition error on training dataset 0 20 40 60 80 1001 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 number of classifiers classification error [%] Recognition error on test dataset Figure 1: Classi cation error of Bagging and Boosting algorithm on the training and training datatsets ( dashed: Bagging, solid: Boosting).
learners. TBL operates on words, but words are not treated as independent instances.
Their context, the position in the sentence, a ects the building of the classi er.
Thus instead of the straightforward selection of words, the boosting method handles the sentences as instance samples.
The classi cation error of the instances are calculated as the arithmetic mean of the classi cation errors of the words in the corresponding sentence.
Despite this, the combined nal error is expressed as the relative number of the misclassi ed words.
The training and testing datasets were chosen from the business news domain of the Szeged Corpus.
The train database contained about 128,000 annotated words in 5700 sentences.
The remaining part of the domain, the test database, has 13,300 words in 600 sentences.
The results of training and testing error rates are shown in Fig.1.
The classi cation error of the stand-alone TBL algorithm on the test dataset was 1.74%.
Boosting is capable of decreasing it to below 1.31%, which means a 24.7% relative error reduction.
As the graphs show, boosting achieves this during the rst 20 iterations, so further processing steps cannot make much di erence to the classi cation accuracy.
It can also be seen that the training error does not converge to a zero-error level.
This behavior is due to the fact that the learner cannot maintain the 50% weighted error limit condition.
Bagging achieved only a moderate gain in accuracy, its relative error reduction rate being 18%.
5 Conclusions
In this paper we investigated the possibility of improving the classi cation performance of POS taggers by applying classi er combination schemas.
For the experiments we chose TBL as a tagger and Bagging and Boosting as combination schemas.
The results indicates that Bagging and Boosting can reduce the classi cation error of the TBL tagger by 18% and 24.7%, respectively.
It is clear that further improvements could be made by tailoring the tagger algorithm to the requirements of more sophisticated boosting methods like Adaboost.M2 and other derivatives optimized for multiclass recognition.
Another promising idea for more e ective combinations is that of applying con dence-type generative (ANN, kNN, SVM) or discriminative (HMM) learners (Duda et al., 2001; Bishop, 1995; Vapnik, 1998).
These kinds of classi ers provide more information about the recognition results and can improve the cooperation between the combiner and the classi ers.
In the future we plan to investigate these alternatives for constructing better tagger combinations.
195 References Zolt an Alexin, Szilvia Zvada, and Tibor Gyim othy.
1999. Application of AGLEARN on Hungarian Part-of-Speech tagging.
In D.
Parigot and M.
Mernik, editors, Second Workshop on Attribute Grammars and their Applications, WAGA’99, pages 133 152, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
INRIA rocquencourt.
Zolt an Alexin, J anos Csirik, Tibor Gyim othy, K aroly Bibok, Csaba Hatvani, G abor Pr osz eki, and L aszl o Tihanyi.
2003. Manually annotated Hungarian corpus.
In Proceedings of the Research Note Sessions of the 10th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL’03, pages 5356, Budapest, Hungary.
C. M.
Bishop. 1995.
Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition.
Oxford University Press.
Thorsten Brants.
2000. TnT { a statistical partof-speech tagger.
In Proceedings of the Sixth Applied Natural Language Processing, ANLP2000, Seattle, WA.
L. Breiman.
1996. Bagging predictors.
Machine Learning, 24, no.
2:123140. Eric Brill.
1995. Transformation-based errordriven learning and natural language processing: A case study in part-of-speech tagging.
Computational Linguistics, 21(4):543565.
Ludmila Dimitrova, Toma z Erjavec, Nancy Ide, Heiki Jaan Kaalep, Vladimir Petkevic, and Dan Tu s.
1998. Multext-east: Parallel and comparable corpora and lexicons for six Central and Eastern European languages.
In Christian Boitet and Pete Whitelock, editors, Proceedings of the Thirty-Sixth Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and Seventeenth International Conference on Computational Linguistics, pages 315319, San Francisco, California.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
R. O.
Duda, P.
E. Hart, and D.
G. Stork.
2001. Pattern Classi cation.
John Wiley and Son, New York.
Yoav Freund and Robert E.
Schapire. 1996.
Experiments with a new boosting algorithm.
In Morgan Kaufmann, editor, Proc International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 148 156, San Francisco.
Andr as H ocza, Zolt an Alexin, D ora Csendes, J anos Csirik, and Tibor Gyim othy.
2003. Application of ILP methods in di erent natural language processing phases for information extraction from Hungarian texts.
In Proceedings of the Kalm ar Workshop on Logic and Computer Science, pages 107116, Szeged, Hungary.
Tam as Horv ath, Zolt an Alexin, Tibor Gyim othy, and Stefan Wrobel.
1999. Application of different learning methods to Hungarian Part-ofSpeech tagging.
In S.
D zeroski and P.
Flach, editors, Proceedings of ILP99, volume 1634 of LNAI, pages 128139.
Springer Verlag.
Andr as Kuba, Andr as H ocza, and J anos Csirik.
2004. POS tagging of Hungarian with combined statistical and rule-based methods.
In Petr Sojka, Ivan Kopecek, and Karel Pala, editors, Text, Speech and Dialogue, Proceedings of the 7th International Conference, TSD 2004, pages 113121, Brno, Czech Republic.
Be ata Megyesi.
1998. Brill’s rule-based POS tagger for Hungarian.
Master’s thesis, Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University, Sweden.
Be ata Megyesi.
1999. Improving Brill’s POS tagger for an agglutinative language.
In Proceedings of the Joint Sigdat Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Very Large Corpora, EMNLP/VLC ’99, pages 275284.
Grace Ngai and Radu Florian.
2001. Transformation-based learning in the fast lane.
In Proceedings of North American ACL 2001, pages 4047, June.
Csaba Oravecz and P eter Dienes.
2002. E cient stochastic Part-of-Speech tagging for Hungarian.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC2002, pages 710717, Las Palmas.
G abor Pr osz eky.
1995. Humor: a morphological system for corpus analysis.
In H.
Retting, editor, Language Resources for Language Technology, Proceedings of the First European TELRI Seminar, pages 149158, Tihany, Hungary.
Dan Tu s, P eter Dienes, Csaba Oravecz, and Tam as V aradi.
2000. Principled hidden tagset design for tiered tagging of Hungarian.
V. N.
Vapnik. 1998.
Statistical Learning Theory.
John Wiley and Son.
Tam as V aradi.
2002. The Hungarian National Corpus.
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC2002, pages 385396, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria. 196

