A Novel Method for Content Consistency and Efficient Full-text Search for P2P Content Sharing Systems Hideki Mima University of Tokyo 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan mima@biz-model.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp Hideto Tomabechi Cognitive Research Lab 7-8-25 Roppongi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan Hideto_Tomabechi@crl.co.jp Abstract A problem associated with current P2P (peer-to-peer) systems is that the consistency between copied contents is not guaranteed.
Additionally, the limitation of fulltext search capability in most of the popular P2P systems hinders the scalability of P2P-based content sharing systems.
We proposed a new P2P content sharing system in which the consistency of contents in the network is maintained after updates or modifications have been made to the contents.
Links to the downloaded contents are maintained on a server.
As a result, the updates and modifications to the contents can be instantly detected and hence get reflected in future P2P downloads.
Natural language processing including morphological analysis is performed distributedly by the P2P clients and the update of the inverted index on the server is conducted concurrently to provide an efficient full-text search.
The scheme and a preliminary experimental result have been mentioned 1 Introduction P2P content sharing systems can distribute large amounts of contents with limited resources.
By utilizing this exceptional feature, the P2P content sharing model is expected to be one of the major means for exchanging contents.
However, the presently available P2P content sharing systems are mainly used to illegally copy movies and music contents.
In some cases, the service providers are accused of such illegal data exchange.
We have recognized that the following technical problems may result in the above mentioned misuse of P2P.
First, the presently available commercial P2P content sharing systems do not provide sufficient functions to track the exchange of contents among users.
Due to this, service providers cannot monitor the illegal exchange or tampering of shared contents among users.
Second, the presently available commercial P2P content sharing systems only provide simple search functions, such as keyword search; therefore, they are unsuitable for contents that are either frequently updated or have text.
In practice, the current P2P content sharing systems are mainly used to only share movies and music contents because these are not frequently updated.
The development of an appropriate search method for the P2P content sharing system is required in order to apply them to search text contents and the latest version of contents.
In order to solve these technical problems, we are developing a content consistency maintenance method and an information search technique for P2P content sharing systems.
Our content consistency maintenance method consists of a technique that prevents the tampering of contents and a method that maintains consistency between the following: 1.
how users exchange contents on a P2P contents sharing system and 2.
how the service provider recognizes the exchange of contents.
Finally, we aim to standardize the result of previous research [10].
In order to handle the updates of contents, the P2P content sharing system that we are developing maintains digital signs for each version of the content.
Our system uses a download protocol based on asymmetric key encryption to maintain content consistency.
In order to obtain the latest version of contents, even for updated contents, this method employs links to the original and the downloaded contents.
These links are managed on a central server.
In order to efficiently implement a full-text search, clients connected to our system perform morphological analysis and summarization of the text to generate text information that is necessary for building a reverse index on a central server.
The text information is stored on a central server when the content is updated.
To reduce the load of full-text search, the search results are cached on clients.
By these techniques, we can distribute the load of natural language processing among clients and rapidly search text contents with content updates.
In this paper, we briefly describe the P2P content sharing system that we are developing and the techniques used in it, namely, a content consistency maintenance method and a full-text search method.
We also report the result of a preliminary experiment on load balancing of full-text search by our technique.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes related work.
Section 3 briefly describes the 25 P2P content sharing system that we are developing.
Sections 4 and 5 describe techniques for content consistency maintenance and full-text search, respectively.
Finally, Section 6 presents the conclusion and future work.
2 Related
Work The two kinds of researches related to our work are researches on content consistency maintenance and those on information search in a P2P environment.
In this paper, we refer to a hybrid P2P system, such as Napster that uses a central server, as a P2P system, although it is not entirely decentralized.
This is because, even a hybrid P2P system has an important advantage in terms of content sharing; it can distribute large amounts of contents with less bandwidth consumption on the service providers side.
2.1 Contents
Consistency Maintenance Since the contents are stored on clients in a P2P content sharing system, malicious clients can tamper with the contents if no protection method against tampering is provided.
The MD5 hash function in the protocol of Napster [4] enables a content publisher to send the hash value of a content to a central server when it publishes the content.
Freenet [2] prevents tampering with the content by using the hash value of a content as its key.
This technique is effective in preventing the tampering of static content such as a movie or music content.
However, when this technique is applied to frequently updated contents, each version is treated as a separate content because different versions have different keys.
To handle such frequently updated contents, Freenet introduced indirect files in which the hash values of the contents are stored.
By retrieving an indirect file, a user can retrieve the last updated content in two steps.
In order to share frequently updated contents, we need to provide a mechanism that associates the content ID with the hash value of a particular version of the content, as in the case of Freenet.
Another problem of P2P content sharing systems is that the provider of a content sharing service cannot trace the exchange of contents among users.
Napster, which is a centralized P2P content sharing system similar to our system, uses a download protocol by which the clients send a download request to the central server before they download the content from another client.
After this, the central server does not participate in the download process of the content.
Using this protocol, the central server cannot identify whether a download has been carried out successfully or not.
A malicious client can send the same information to the central server and pretend that a download request has been made by another client.
It is also possible to send tampered content to another client without being detected by the central server.
2.2 Information
Search in P2P Environment The two types of search techniques that are widely used in P2P content sharing systems include using a central search server [4] and flooding of search requests [6].
The problems of using a central server, such as poor scalability of a central search server and vulnerability that arises from a single point of failure, are widely known.
The flooding of search requests also has scalability problems.
As the number of nodes in a network increases, more search requests are flooded that consume a major part of the bandwidth.
In order to reduce search requests, many systems use flooding techniques that often limit the search range with heuristic methods.
As a result, it cannot be assured that all existing contents in a network can be found in these systems.
In order to solve the problems associated with the above mentioned techniques, several search methods based on distributed hash tables (DHT) have been proposed [5] [7].
These methods are scalable to a considerable extent.
A characteristic of these methods is that exact match key search can be done with O (log n) or O (n a ) hops.
Reynolds and Vahdat proposed a method for implementing full-text search by distributing the reverse index on a DHT.
In this method, a key in a hash table corresponds to a particular keyword in a document, and a value in a hash table corresponds to a document that contains a keyword.
A client that publishes a document notifies the nodes that correspond to the keywords contained in the document and updates the reverse indexes on these nodes.
In this method, the load of the full-text search can be distributed among the nodes.
We can also expect that the reverse indexes on the nodes can be updated rapidly by pushing the latest keywords in the contents from a client.
On the other hand, this method has several limitations.
For example, when an AND search is performed by this method, the search results must be transferred between the nodes.
Li estimated the amount of resources that is necessary to implement a full-text search engine based on this method and pointed out that it is difficult to implement a largescale search engine, such as Google, by this method [8].
Furthermore, if this method were applied to a P2P content sharing system, the problem of low availability of nodes would arise because the users’ PCs would be used as nodes in such a system.
In order to store reverse indexes on the nodes, we have to replicate them to ensure the availability of indexes.
This would require more resources than that estimated by Li.
26 Based on the above mentioned reasons, we believe that a full-text search technique using a central search server that manages reverse indexes is more feasible than a distributed reverse index technique for implementing a full-text search engine in a P2P environment.
3 System
Architecture Figure 1 shows the architecture of our system.
As described earlier, we chose a central server architecture to provide a full-text search of the contents.
The public keys of the clients are stored on a central server.
By sending a request to the server, a client can obtain a public key of another client that is connected with the central server.
The central server also has private and public keys.
Its public key is available to all the clients.
Each client has a unique ID.
When a client connects to the central server, it sends its own IP address.
Another client can obtain the IP address of a client by querying to the server using its client ID.
The central server provides a content consistency maintenance mechanism and a full-text search engine.
These mechanisms are described in the following sections.
4 Content
Consistency Maintenance 4.1 Data Structure for Content Management In this system, a publisher of a document digitally signs a document with its private key and registers its sign to the central search server with its unique ID.
When a document is a text document, a client performs morphological analysis to generate search keywords from a document.
The ID of contents and digital signs corresponding to different versions are managed on the central search server.
Using the ID and version, a client can obtain a digital sign for a document by querying to the central server using its ID and version.
Using a digital sign ensures that a malicious client does not tamper with a document.
A search result obtained from the central server is also digitally signed to ensure that a client does not tamper with it.
As described in detail in section 5, a search result is cached on a client and can be modified.
To prevent this, a search result comprises the ID of contents and a digital sign.
In this system, a client can obtain the latest version of a document when a document is updated, by querying its ID to the central server.
However, a limitation associated with this method is that only the latest version of documents can be obtained.
For example, by using indirect files and hash values of contents as in Freenet, we can obtain previous versions of a document by directly specifying a hash value of an earlier version.
However, neither does Freenet assure that the latest version is always obtained nor does it assure that a particular earlier version is obtained because a previous version may be deleted if there is no request for it in a certain period.
In our system, we consider only the latest version of a document which can be obtained at any time.
Thus, we define our document query protocol in order to obtain the latest version.
In order to prevent the concentration of download requests on a certain client, our system manages a list of clients that have downloaded the latest version of a document and distributes download sources to these clients using this list.
In this method, the ID of a client that downloads the latest version of a document is added to a list; this ID corresponds with the ID of the document.
When a client sends a request to the central server to download a document, the central server selects an appropriate client from a downloader’s list and returns its ID to the client.
When the publisher updates a document, the list corresponding to that document is emptied.
We describe this procedure by the following pseudo codes, where download is a function that requests the download of a document, nodeId is the ID of a client that requests the download, update is a function that requests the update of a document, and getNodeId is a function that gets the ID of a client that downloads a document whose ID is docId.
nodeIdList: document ID x node ID list download(docId, nodeId) { nodeIdList[docId].add(nodeId); } update(docId, nodeId) { nodeIdList[docId] = {nodeId}; } getNodeId(docId) { index = rand() * nodeIdList[docId].length; return nodeIdList[docId][index]; } 4.2 Tracing How Contents are Exchanged In a P2P content sharing system that uses a simple download protocol, such as Napster, when a service Client public keys Contents certificate Links to contents Full-text search index Contents Figure 1.
System Architecture Central server Client Client Client 27

