1:16	IJCNLP-08Workshop On NLPforLessPrivileged Languages ProceedingsoftheWorkshop 11January2008 IIIT, Hyderabad,India c2008 Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing ii Introduction Welcome to the IJCNLP Workshop on NLP for Less Privileged Languages, a meeting held in conjunction with the Third International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing at Hyderabad, India.
2:16	The goal of this workshop is to ascertain the progress made in providing computational support for less computerized or less privileged languages and in building language resources and Natural Language Processing tools etc. for such languages.
3:16	An introductory article explains the background of and motivation for this workshop.
4:16	It also presents an overview of the papers selected for the workshop.
5:16	The workshop attracted a lot of interest from around the world.
6:16	There were a relatively large number of submissions and each paper was reviewed by three reviewers, which ensured that the quality of papers selected was comparable to other successful workshops held previously on similar themes.
7:16	The selected papers include a variety of topics and covers a wide range of languages.
8:16	Another major feature of the workshop is that it includes three invited talks by speakers from different regions of the world and on very different topics.
9:16	We would like to thank the program committee members for all the hard work that they did during the reviewing process.
10:16	We would also like to thank all the people involved in organizing the IJCNLP conference.
11:16	We hope that this workshop will be able to achieve its goal and will stimulate and encourage even more interest in the theme of the workshop so that the gap between languages like English and the less computerized less privileged or languages can be reduced at a rapid pace.
12:16	Anil Kumar Singh (Chair) iii  Organizer: Anil Kumar Singh, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Program Committee: Steven Bird, University of Melbourne, Australia Rajeev Sangal, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Michael Maxwell, University of Maryland, USA Bente Maegaard, CST, University of Copenhagen, Denmark Lakshmi Bai, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Emily M. Bender, University of Washington, USA Nicoletta Calzolari, Istituto di Linguistica Computazionale del CNR Pisa, Italy Alexander Gelbukh, Center for Computing Research, National Polytechnic Institute, Mexico Sarmad Hussain, CRULP, Pakistan Greville Corbett, University of Surrey, UK Anil Kumar Singh, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Sobha L., AU-KBC, Chennai, India Rachel Edita Roxas, Dela Salle University, Manila, Philippines Sivaji Bandyopadhyay, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Nicholas Thieberger, University of Melbourne, Australia Monojit Choudhury, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India Xabier Arregi, University of the Basque Country, Spain Khalid Choukri, ELRA Paris, France Samar Husain, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Indra Budi, University of Indonesia, Indonesia Rajat Mohanty, Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, India Jeff Good, University at Buffalo, USA Prasad Pingali, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Harshit Surana, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Special Acknowledgment: Samar Husain, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Harshit Surana, IIIT, Hyderabad, India Invited Speakers: Anne David and Michael Maxwell, CASL, University of Maryland, USA Virach Sornlertlamvanich, TCL, NICT, Thailand Monojit Choudhury, Microsoft Research, India v  Table of Contents Invited Talk: Building Language Resources: Ways to move forward Anne David and Micheal Maxwell  1 Invited Talk: Cross Language Resource Sharing Virach Sornlertlamvanich3 Invited Talk: Breaking the Zipfian Barrier of NLP Monojit Choudhury5 Natural Language Processing for Less Privileged Languages: Where do we come from?
13:16	Where are we going?
14:16	Anil Kumar Singh  7 KUI: an ubiquitous tool for collective intelligence development Thatsanee Charoenporn, Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Hitoshi Isahara and Kergrit Robkop  13 Prototype Machine Translation System From Text-To-Indian Sign Language Tirthankar Dasgupta, Sandipan Dandpat and Anupam Basu19 Joint Grammar Development by Linguists and Computer Scientists Michael Maxwell and Anne David  27 Cross-Language Parser Adaptation between Related Languages Daniel Zeman and Philip Resnik  35 SriShell Primo: A Predictive Sinhala Text Input System Sandeva Goonetilleke, Yoshihiko Hayashi, Yuichi Itoh and Fumio Kishino  43 A Rule-based Syllable Segmentation of Myanmar Text Zin Maung Maung and Yoshiki Mikami51 Strategies for sustainable MT for Basque: incremental design, reusability, standardization and opensource I. Alegria, X. Arregi, X. Artola, A. Diaz de Ilarraza, G. Labaka, M. Lersundi, A. Mayor and K. Sarasola59 Design of a Rule-based Stemmer for Natural Language Text in Bengali Sandipan Sarkar and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay65 Finite State Solutions For Reduplication In Kinyarwanda Language Jackson Muhirwe and Trond Trosterud73 An Optimal Order of Factors for the Computational Treatment of Personal Anaphoric Devices in Urdu Discourse Mohammad Naveed Ali, M. A. Khan and Muhammad Aamir Khan81 vii Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger Thoudam Doren Singh and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay  91 Acharya A Text Editor and Framework for working with Indic Scripts Krishnakumar V and Indrani Roy  99 Implementing a Speech Recognition System Interface for Indian Languages R.K. Aggarwal and M. Dave105 Indigenous Languages of Indonesia: Creating Language Resources for Language Preservation Hammam Riza113 Part-Of-Speech Tagging for Gujarati Using Conditional Random Fields Chirag Patel and Karthik Gali117 Speech to speech machine translation: Biblical chatter from Finnish to English David Ellis, Mathias Creutz, Timo Honkela and Mikko Kurimo  123 viii Conference Program Friday, January 11, 2008 09:00-09:10 Opening Remarks: Natural Language Processing for Less Privileged Languages: Where do we come from?
15:16	Where are we going?
16:16	Anil Kumar Singh Session 1: 09:10-09:40 Invited Talk: Building Language Resources: Ways to move forward Anne David and Micheal Maxwell 09:40-10:00 KUI: an ubiquitous tool for collective intelligence development Thatsanee Charoenporn, Virach Sornlertlamvanich, Hitoshi Isahara and Kergrit Robkop 10:00-10:20 Prototype Machine Translation System From Text-To-Indian Sign Language Tirthankar Dasgupta, Sandipan Dandpat and Anupam Basu 10:20-11:00 Break Session 2: 11:00-11:30 Invited Talk: Cross Language Resource Sharing Virach Sornlertlamvanich 11:30-11:50 Joint Grammar Development by Linguists and Computer Scientists Michael Maxwell and Anne David 11:50-12:10 Cross-Language Parser Adaptation between Related Languages Daniel Zeman and Philip Resnik 12:10-12:30 SriShell Primo: A Predictive Sinhala Text Input System Sandeva Goonetilleke, Yoshihiko Hayashi, Yuichi Itoh and Fumio Kishino 12:30-14:00 Lunch Session 3: 14:00-14:30 Invited Talk: Breaking the Zipfian Barrier of NLP Monojit Choudhury ix Friday, January 11, 2008 (continued) 14:30-15:30 Poster Display and Discussion An Optimal Order of Factors for the Computational Treatment of Personal Anaphoric Devices in Urdu Discourse Mohammad Naveed Ali, M. A. Khan and Muhammad Aamir Khan Morphology Driven Manipuri POS Tagger Thoudam Doren Singh and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay Acharya A Text Editor and Framework for working with Indic Scripts Krishnakumar V and Indrani Roy Implementing a Speech Recognition System Interface for Indian Languages R.K. Aggarwal and M. Dave Indigenous Languages of Indonesia: Creating Language Resources for Language Preservation Hammam Riza Part-Of-Speech Tagging for Gujarati Using Conditional Random Fields Chirag Patel and Karthik Gali Speech to speech machine translation: Biblical chatter from Finnish to English David Ellis, Mathias Creutz, Timo Honkela and Mikko Kurimo 15:30-16:00 Break Session 4: 16:00-16:20 A Rule-based Syllable Segmentation of Myanmar Text Zin Maung Maung and Yoshiki Mikami 16:20-16:40 Strategies for sustainable MT for Basque: incremental design, reusability, standardization and open-source I. Alegria, X. Arregi, X. Artola, A. Diaz de Ilarraza, G. Labaka, M. Lersundi, A. Mayor and K. Sarasola 16:40-17:00 Design of a Rule-based Stemmer for Natural Language Text in Bengali Sandipan Sarkar and Sivaji Bandyopadhyay 17:00-17:20 Finite State Solutions For Reduplication In Kinyarwanda Language Jackson Muhirwe and Trond Trosterud 17:20-18:00 Closing Discussion x

