What Prompts Translators to Modify Draft Translations?
An Analysis of Basic Modiﬁcation Patterns for Use in
the Automatic Notiﬁcation of Awkwardly Translated Text
Takeshi Abekawa and Kyo Kageura
Library and Information Science Course
Graduate School of Education,
University of Tokyo
{abekawa,kyo}@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
In human translation, translators ﬁrst make
draft translations and then modify them.
This paper analyses these modiﬁcations, in
order to identify the features that trigger
modiﬁcation. Our goal is to construct a sys-
tem that notiﬁes (English-to-Japanese) vol-
unteer translators of awkward translations.
After manually classifying the basic modiﬁ-
cation patterns, we analysed the factors that
trigger a change in verb voice from passive
to active using SVM. An experimental re-
sult shows good prospects for the automatic
identiﬁcation of candidates for modiﬁcation.
1 Introduction
We are currently developing an English-to-Japanese
translation aid system aimed at volunteer transla-
tors mainly working online (Abekawa and Kageura,
2007), As part of this project, we are developing a
module that notiﬁes (inexperienced) translators of
awkwardly translated expressions that may need re-
ﬁnement or editing.
In most cases, translators ﬁrst make draft trans-
lations, and then examine and edit them later, often
repeatedly. Thus there are normally at least two ver-
sions of a given translation, i.e. a draft and the ﬁnal
translation. Incommercialtranslationenvironments,
it is sometimes the case that texts are ﬁrst translated
by inexperienced translators and then edited by ex-
perienced translators. However, this does not ap-
ply to voluntary translation. In addition, volunteer
translators tend to be less experienced than commer-
cial translators, and devote less time to editing. It
would therefore be of great help to these translators
if the CAT system automatically pointed out awk-
ward translations for possible modiﬁcation. In order
torealisesuchasystem, itisnecessarytoﬁrstclarify
(i) the basic types of modiﬁcation made by transla-
tors to draft translations, and (ii) what triggers these
modiﬁcations.
In section 2 we introduce the data used in this
study. Insection3,weclarifythenatureofmodiﬁca-
tion in the translation process. In section 4, we iden-
tify the actual modiﬁcation patterns in the data. In
section 5, focusing on “the change from the passive
to the active voice” pattern, we analyse and clarify
the triggers that may lead to modiﬁcation. Section 6
is devoted to an experiment in which machine learn-
ing methods are used to detect modiﬁcation candi-
dates. The importance of the various triggers is ex-
amined, and the performance of the system is evalu-
ated.
2 The
data
The data used in the present study is the Japanese
translation of an English book about the problem of
peak oil (Leggett, 2005). The book is aimed at a
popular audience and is relevant to the sort of texts
we have in mind, because the majority of texts vol-
unteer translators translate deal with current affairs,
social issues, politics, culture and sports, and/or eco-
nomic issues for a popular audience1. The data con-
sists of the English original (henceforth “English”),
the draft Japanese translation (“Draft”) and the ﬁ-
nal Japanese translation (“Final”). The “Draft” was
made by two translators (one with two years’ experi-
ence and the other with ﬁve years’ experience), and
1Software localisation is another area of translation in which
volunteers are heavily involved. We do not include it in our
target because it has different characteristics.
241

