Learning Patterns from the Web to Translate Named Entities for
Cross Language Information Retrieval
Yu-Chun Wang†‡ Richard Tzong-Han Tsai§⁄ Wen-Lian Hsu†
†Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
‡Department of Eletrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
§Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Yuan Ze University, Taiwan
albyu@iis.sinica.edu.tw
thtsai@saturn.yzu.edu.tw
hsu@iis.sinica.edu.tw
⁄corresponding author
Abstract
Named entity (NE) translation plays
an important role in many applications.
In this paper, we focus on translating
NEs from Korean to Chinese to improve
Korean-Chinese cross-language informa-
tion retrieval (KCIR). The ideographic
nature of Chinese makes NE translation
di–cult because one syllable may map to
several Chinese characters. We propose
a hybrid NE translation system. First,
we integrate two online databases to ex-
tend the coverage of our bilingual dic-
tionaries. We use Wikipedia as a trans-
lation tool based on the inter-language
links between the Korean edition and
the Chinese or English editions. We
also use Naver.com’s people search en-
gine to flnd a query name’s Chinese or
English translation. The second compo-
nent is able to learn Korean-Chinese (K-
C), Korean-English (K-E), and English-
Chinese (E-C) translation patterns from
the web. These patterns can be used to
extract K-C, K-E and E-C pairs from
Google snippets. We found KCIR per-
formance using this hybrid conflgura-
tion over flve times better than that
a dictionary-based conflguration using
only Naver people search. Mean average
precision was as high as 0.3385 and recall
reached 0.7578. Our method can han-
dle Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and non-
CJK NE translation and improve perfor-
mance of KCIR substantially.
1 Introduction
Named entity (NE) translation plays an impor-
tant role in machine translation, information re-
trieval, and question answering. It is a chal-
lenging task because, although there are many
online bilingual dictionaries, they usually lack
domain speciflc words or NEs. Furthermore,
new NEs are generated everyday, but bilingual
dictionaries cannot update their contents fre-
quently. Therefore, it is necessary to construct
a named entity translation (NET) system.
Economic ties between China and Korea have
become closer as China has opened its mar-
kets further, and demand for the latest news
and information from China continues to grow
rapidly in Korea. One key way to meet this
demand is to retrieve information written in
Chinese by using Korean queries, referred to
as Korean-Chinese cross-language information
retrieval (KCIR). The main challenge involves
translating NEs because they are usually the
main concepts of queries. In (Chen et al., 1998),
the authors romanized Chinese NEs and selected
their English transliterations from English NEs
extracted from the Web by comparing their
phonetic similarities with Chinese NEs. Yaser
Al-Onaizan (Al-Onaizan and Knight, 2002)
281
transliterated an NE in Arabic into several can-
didates in English and ranked the candidates by
comparing their counts in several English cor-
pora. Unlike the above works, whose target lan-
guages are alphabetic, in K-C translation, the
target language is Chinese, which uses an ideo-
graphic writing system. Korean-Chinese NET
is much more di–cult than NET considered in
previous works because, in Chinese, one sylla-
ble may map to tens or hundreds of characters.
For example, if an NE written in Korean com-
prises three syllables, there may be thousands of
possible translation candidates in Chinese.
In this paper, we propose an efiective hybrid
NET method which can help improve perfor-
mance of cross-language information retrieval
systems. We also describe the construction of
a Korean-Chinese CLIR system able to evaluate
the efiectiveness of our NE translation method.
2 Di–culties in Korean-Chinese
Named Entity Translation for IR
2.1 Korean
NET
Most Korean NEs originate from Hanja. There-
fore, the most straightforward way to translate
a Korean name into Chinese is to use its Hanja
equivalent. Take the name of Korea’s president,
“노무현” (No Mu-hyeon), as an example. We
can directly convert it to its Hanja equivalent:
“ 武鉉” (Lu Wu-Xuan). Or in the case of the
city name “  ” (Pusan/ 山/Fu-shan) and
the company name “…성” (Samsung/三星/San-
xing), Chinese also presents Hanja equivalents.
If the Hanja name is unknown, the name is
translated character by character. Each Hangul
character is basically translated into a corre-
sponding Hanja character. For example, the
name of the Korean actor “조인성” (Cho In-
seong) is usually translated as “ `成” (Zhao
Ren-cheng) because ‘조’ is mapped to ‘ ’, ‘인’
mapped to ‘`’, and ‘성’ mapped to ‘成’. How-
ever, that translation may difier from the per-
son’s given Hanja name.
For native Korean NEs which have no cor-
responding Hanja characters, we must turn to
transliteration or convention. Take the name of
South Korea’s capital “서‚” (Seoul) as an ex-
ample. Before 2005, Chinese media and govern-
ment used the old Hanja name of the city “漢˛”
(Han-cheng), which was used during Joseon dy-
nasty (A.D. 1392–1910). However, after 2005,
Chinese switched to using the transliteration
“ 爾” (Shou-er) instead of “漢˛” at the re-
quest of the Seoul Metropolitan Government.
This example illustrate how more than one Chi-
nese translation for a Korean name is possible,
a phenomenon which, at times, makes Korean-
Chinese information retrieval more di–cult.
2.2 Chinese
NET
To translate a Chinese NE written in Hangul,
we begin by considering the two C-K NET ap-
proaches. The older is based on the Sino-Korean
pronunciation and the newer on the Mandarin.
For example, “œ灣” (Taiwan) used to be
transliterated solely as “대 ” (Dae-man). How-
ever, during the 1990s, transliteration based on
Mandarin pronunciation became more popular.
Presently, the most common transliteration for
“œ灣” is “ 이완” (Ta-i-wan), though the Sino-
Korean-based “대 ” is still widely used. For
Chinese personal names, both ways are used.
For example, the name of Chinese actor Jackie
Chan (“成 ” Cheng-long) is variously translit-
erated as “성Æ” Seong-ryong (Sino-Korean)
and “› ” Cheong-rung (Mandarin).
Translating Chinese NEs by either method is
a major challenge because each Hangul charac-
ter may correspond to several difierent Chinese
characters that have similar pronunciations in
Korean. This results in thousands of possible
combinations of Chinese characters, making it
very di–cult to choose the most widely used one
one.
2.3 Japanese
NET
Japanese NEs may contain Hiraganas,
Katakanas, or Kanjis. For each character
type, J-C translation rules may be similar to
or very difierent from K-C translation rules.
Some of these rules are based on Japanese
pronunciation, while some are not. For NEs
composed of all Kanjis, their Chinese transla-
tions are generally exactly the same as their
Kanji written forms. In contrast, Japanese NEs
282
are transliterated into Hangul characters. Take
“名 屋” (Nagoya) for example. Its Chinese
translation “名 屋” is exactly the same as
its Kanji written form, while its pronuncia-
tion (Ming Gu Wu) is very difierent from its
Japanese pronunciation. This is difierent from
its Korean translation, “  야” (Na go ya).
In this example, we can see that, because the
translation rules in Chinese and Korean are
difierent, it is inefiective to utilize phonetic sim-
ilarity to flnd the Chinese translation equivalent
to the Korean translation.
2.4 Non-CJK NET
In both Korean and Chinese, transliteration
methods are mostly used to translate non-CJK
NEs. Korean uses the Hangul alphabet for
transliteration. Because of the phonology of
Korean, some phonemes are changed during
translation because the language lacks these
phonemes. (Oh, 2003; Lee, 2003) In contrast,
Chinese transliterates each syllable in a NE into
Chinese characters with similar pronunciation.
Although there are some conventions for select-
ing the transliteration characters, there are still
many possible transliterations since so many
Chinese characters have the same pronunciation.
For instance, the name “Greenspan” has sev-
eral Chinese transliterations, such as “葛 fl ”
(Ge-lin-si-ban) and “葛 fl潘” (Ge-lin-si-pan).
In summary, it is di–cult to match a non-CJK
NE transliterated from Korean with its Chinese
transliteration due to the latter’s variations.
3 Our
Method
In this section, we describe our Korean-Chinese
NE translation method for dealing with the
problems described in Section 2. We either
translate NE candidates from Korean into Chi-
nese directly, or translate them into English flrst
and then into Chinese. Our method is a hybrid
of two components: extended bilingual dictio-
naries and web-based NET.
3.1 Named
Entity Candidate Selection
The flrst step is to identify which words in a
query are NEs. In general, Korean queries are
composed of several eojeols, each of which is
composed of a noun followed by the noun’s post-
position, or a verb stem followed by the verb’s
ending. We remove the postposition or the end-
ing to extract the key terms, and then select per-
son name candidates from the key terms. Next,
the maximum matching algorithm is applied to
further segment each term into words in the
Daum Korean-Chinese bilingual dictionary1. If
the length of any token segmented from a term
is 1, the term is regarded as an NE to be trans-
lated.
3.2 Extension
of Bilingual Dictionaries
Most NEs are not included in general bilingual
dictionaries. We adopt two online databases
to translate NEs: Wikipedia and Naver people
search.
3.2.1 Wikipedia
In Wikipedia, each article has an inter-
language link to other language editions, which
we exploit to translate NEs. Each NE candidate
is flrst sent to the Korean Wikipedia, and the
title of the matched article’s Chinese version is
treated as the NE’s translation in Chinese. How-
ever, if the article lacks a Chinese version, we use
the English edition to acquire the NE’s transla-
tion in English. The English translation is then
transliterated into Chinese by the method de-
scribed in Section 3.3.3.
3.2.2 Naver
People Search Engine
Most NEs are person names that cannot all
be covered by the encyclopedia. We use Naver
people search engine to extend the coverage of
person names. Naver people search is a transla-
tion tool that maintains a database of famous
people’s basic proflles. If the person is from
CJK, the search engine returns his/her name in
Chinese; otherwise, it returns the name in En-
glish. In the former case, we can adopt the re-
turned name directly, but in the latter, we need
to translate the name into Chinese. The trans-
lation method is described in Section 3.3.3.
1http://cndic.daum.net
283
3.3 Translation
Pattern from the Web
Obviously, the above methods cannot cover all
possible translations of NEs. Therefore, we pro-
pose a pattern-based method to flnd the trans-
lation from the Web. Since the Chinese transla-
tions of some NEs cannot be found by patterns,
we flnd their Chinese translations indirectly by
flrst flnding their English translations and then
flnding the Chinese translations. Therefore,
we must generate K-C patterns to extract K-C
translation pairs, as well as K-E and E-C pat-
terns to extract K-E and E-C pairs, respectively.
3.3.1 Translation
Pattern Learning
Our motivation is to learn patterns for ex-
tracting NEs written in the source language and
their equivalents in the target language from
the Web. First, we need to prepare the train-
ing set. To generate K-C and K-E patterns,
we collect thousands of NEs that originated in
Korean, Chinese, Japanese, or non-CJK lan-
guages from Dong-A Ilbo (a South Korean news-
paper). Then, all the Korean NEs are translated
into Chinese manually. NEs from non-CJK lan-
guages are also translated into English. To gen-
erate E-C patterns, we collect English NEs from
the MUC-6 and MUC-7 datasets and translate
them into Chinese manually.
We submit each NE in the source language
(source NE) and its translation in the target lan-
guage as a query to Google search engine. For
instance, the Korean NE “메이저‹ł” and its
translation “Major League” are flrst composed
as a query “+메이저리 “ + Major League”,
which is then sent to Google. The search en-
gine will return the relevant web documents with
their snippets. We collect the snippets in the
top 20 pages and we break them into sentences.
Only the sentences that contain at least one
source NE and its translation are retained.
For each pair of retained sentences, we apply
the Smith-Waterman local alignment algorithm
to flnd the longest common string, which is then
added to the candidate pattern pool. During the
alignment process, positions where the two in-
put sequences share the same word are counted
as a match. The following is an example of a pair
of sentences that contains “메이저‹ł” and its
English translation, “Major League”:
† “메이저‹ł(Major League) 수˛은 
 끝—˜ 한 물 ¨ ”
† “ł국메이저‹ł(Major League) ,”
After alignment, the pattern is generated as:
<Korean NE>(<English Translation>) 
This pattern generation process is repeated for
each NE-translation pair.
3.3.2 Translation
Pattern Filtering
After learning the patterns, we have to fllter
out some inefiective patterns. First, we send
a Korean NE, such as “메이저‹ł”, to re-
trieve the snippets in the top 50 pages. Then,
we apply all the patterns to extract the trans-
lations from the snippets. The correct rate of
each translation pattern is calculated as follows:
CorrectRate = Ccorrect/Call, where Ccorrect is
the total number of correct translations ex-
tracted by the pattern and Call is the total num-
ber of translations extracted by the pattern.
If the correct rate of the pattern is below the
threshold ¿, the pattern will be dropped.
3.3.3 Pattern-Based NET
The translations of some NEs, especially from
CJK, can be found comparatively easily from
the Web. However, for other NEs, especially
from non-CJK, this is not the case. There-
fore, we split the translation process into two
stages: the flrst translates the NE into its En-
glish equivalent, and the second translates the
English equivalent into Chinese.
To flnd an NE’s Chinese translation, we flrst
apply the translation patterns to extract possi-
ble Chinese translations. If its Chinese transla-
tion cannot be found, the K-E patterns are used
to flnd its English translation instead. If its En-
glish translation can be found, the E-C patterns
are then used to flnd its Chinese translation.
4 System
Description
We construct a Korean-Chinese cross language
information retrieval (KCIR) system to deter-
mine how our person name translation methods
afiect KCIR’s performance. A Korean query is
284
translated into Chinese and then used to retrieve
Chinese documents. The following sections de-
scribe the four stages of our KCIR system. We
use an example query, “코⁄ 의‹ ,  ,유
 ” (Kosovo’s situation, NATO, UN), to demon-
strate the work  ow of our system.
4.1 Query
Processing
Unlike English, Korean written texts do not
have word delimiters. Spaces in Korean sen-
tences separate eojeols. First, the postposition
or verb ending in each eojeol is removed. In our
example query, we remove the possessive post-
position “의”at the end of the flrst eojeol. Then,
NE candidates are selected using the method de-
scribed in Section 3.1. “코⁄ ” (Kosovo) is
recognized as an NE, and other terms “‹ ”
(situation), “  ” (NATO), and “유 ” (UN)
are general terms because they can be found in
the bilingual dictionary.
4.1.1 Query
Translation
Terms not selected as NE candidates are sent
to the online Daum Korean-Chinese dictionary
and Naver Korean-Chinese dictionary2 to get
their Chinese translations. In our example, the
terms “‹ ” (situation), “  ” (NATO), and
“유 ” (UN) can be correctly translated into
Chinese by the bilingual dictionaries as “ 態”
(situation), “北大西洋公約組織” (NATO), and
“聯合國” (UN), respectively.
We employ Wikipedia, Naver people search,
and the pattern-based method simultaneously to
translate the NE candidate “코⁄ ” (Kosovo).
Up to now, there is no article about Kosovo in
Korean Wikipedia. Naver people search does
not contain an article either because it is not a
person name. Meanwhile, since the K-C transla-
tion patterns cannot extract any Chinese trans-
lations, the K-E patterns are used to get the En-
glish translations, such as “Kosovo”, “Cosbo”,
and “Kosobo”. The E-C patterns are then em-
ployed to get the Chinese translation from the
three English translations. Among them, only
Chinese translations for “Kosovo” can be found
because the other two are either wrong or rarely
2http://cndic.naver.com
used translations. The Chinese translations ex-
tracted by our patterns are “ 索夫” (Ke-suo-
fu), “ 索伏” (Ke-suo-fu), and “ 索 ” (Ke-
suo-wuo). They are all correct transliterations.
4.2 Term
Disambiguation
A Hangul word might have many meanings. Be-
sides, sometimes the translation patterns might
extract wrong translations of the NE. This phe-
nomenon causes ambiguities during information
retrieval and in uence the performance of IR sig-
niflcantly. To solve this problem, we adopt the
mutual information score (MI score) to evaluate
the co-relation between a translation candidate
tcij for a term qti and all translation candidates
for all the other terms in Q; tcij’s MI score given
Q is calculated as follows:
MI score(tcij|Q) =
|Q|∑
x=1,x̸=i
Z(qtx)∑
y=1
Pr(tcij,tcxy)
Pr(tcij)Pr(tcxy)
where Z(qtx) is the number of translation can-
didates of the x-th query term qtx; tcxy is y-
th translation candidate for qtx; Pr(tcij,tcxy) is
the probability that tcij and tcxy co-occur in
the same sentence; and Pr(tcij) is the proba-
bility of tcij. Next, we compute the ratio of
the each candidate’s score over the highest can-
didate’s score as follows: ScoreRatio(tcij) =
MI score(tcij|Q)/MI score(tcih|Q), where tcih is
the candidate with highest MI score from the
qti. If the candidate’s score ratio is below the
threshold ¿MI, the candidate will be discarded.
Here, we use the above example to illustrate
the term disambiguation mechanism. For the
given English term “Kosovo”, the MI scores of
“ 索夫”, “ 索伏”, and “ 索 ” are computed;
“ 索伏” achieves the highest score, while the
score ratio of the other two candidates are much
lower than the threshold. Thus, only “ 索伏”
is treated as Kosovo’s translation and used to
build the flnal Chinese query to perform the IR.
4.3 Indexing
and Retrieval Model
We use the Lucene information retrieval engine
to index all documents and the bigram index
based on Chinese characters. The Okapi BM25
function (Robertson et al., 1996) is used to score
285
a retrieved document’s relevance. In addition,
we employ the following document re-ranking
function (Yang et al., 2007):
√
(∑Ki=1 df(t,di)£f(i))/K
DF(t,C)/R £
√
|t|
df(t,di) =
{
1 t ∈ di
0 t /∈ di ,
where di is the ith document; R is the total num-
ber of documents in the collection C; DF(t,C)
is the number of documents containing a term t
in C; and |t| is t’s length, f(i) = 1sqrt(i).
5 Evaluation
and Analysis
To evaluate our KCIR system, we use the topic
and document collections of the NTCIR-5 CLIR
tasks (Kishida et al., 2005). The document
collection is the Chinese Information Retrieval
Benchmark (CIRB) 4.0, which contains news
articles published in four Taiwanese newspa-
pers from 2000 to 2001. The topics have four
flelds: title, description, narration, and con-
centrate words. We use 50 topics provided by
NTCIR-5 and use the title fleld as the input
query because it is similar to queries input to
search engines.
We construct flve runs as follows:
† Baseline: using a Korean-Chinese
dictionary-based translation.
† Baseline+Extended Dictionaries only:
the baseline system plus the extended dic-
tionaries translation.
† Baseline+NET Methods: the baseline
system plus our NET methods, namely,
Wikipedia, Naver people search, and the
pattern-based method.
† Google Translation: using the Google
translation tool.
† Chinese monolingual: using the Chinese
versions of the topics given by NTCIR.
We use the Mean Average Precision (MAP)
and Recall (Saracevic et al., 1988) to evaluate
the performance of IR. NTCIR provides two
Table 1: Evaluation Results
Run MAP RecallRigid Relax Rigid Relax
Baseline 0.0553 0.0611 0.2202 0.2141
Baseline+extended
dictionaries
0.1573 0.1751 0.5706 0.5489
Baseline+NET 0.2576 0.2946 0.7255 0.7103
Google translation 0.1340 0.1521 0.5254 0.5149
Chinese mono 0.2622 0.3019 0.7705 0.7452
kinds of relevance judgments: Rigid and Re-
lax. A document is rigid-relevant if it is highly
relevant to the topic; and relax-relevant if it is
highly relevant or partially relevant to the topic.
Table 1 shows that our method improves
KCIR substantially. Our method’s performance
is about flve times better than that of the base-
line system and very close to that of Chinese
monolingual IR. Wikipedia translation improves
the performance, but not markedly because
Wikipedia cannot cover some NEs. Google
translation is not very satisfactory either, since
many NEs cannot be translated correctly.
To evaluate our NE translation method, we
create two additional datasets. The flrst dataset
contains all the 30 topics with NEs in NTCIR-
5. To further investigate the efiectiveness of
our method for queries containing person names,
which are the most frequent NEs, we construct
a second dataset containing 16 topics with per-
son names in NTCIR-5. We compare the per-
formance of our method on KCIR with that of
Chinese monolingual IR on these two datasets.
The results are shown in Tables 2 and 3.
5.1 Efiectiveness
of Extended Dict
We adopt two online dictionaries to extend
our bilingual dictionaries: Wikipedia and Naver
people search engine. Wikipedia is an efiective
tool for translating well-known NEs. In the test
topics, NEs like “김정일”(Kim Jong-il, North
Korea’s leader), “¨‹반”(Taliban), “해‹ 
터”(Harry Potter) and “한 라ø”(Great Na-
tional Party in South Korea) are all translated
correctly by Wikipedia.
We observe that the most di–cult cases in
Korean-Chinese person name translation, espe-
cially Japanese and non-CJK person names, can
286
be successfully translated by the Naver people
search engine. For example, “코 ”(William
Cohen, the ex-Secretary of Defense of the U.S.)
and “이치로”(Ichiro Suzuki, a Japanese base-
ball player). The major advantage of the Naver
people search engine is it can can provide the
original names written in Chinese characters.
According to our evaluation, the extended
dictionaries improve the IR performance of the
baseline system about threefold. It shows that
the extended dictionaries can translate part of
Korean NEs into Chinese. However, there are
still many NEs that the extended dictionaries
cannot cover.
5.2 Efiectiveness
of Patterns
In our method, we employ automatically learned
patterns to extract translations for the remain-
ing NEs not covered by the o†ine or online dic-
tionaries. For example, we can extract Chinese
translations for “오⁄ 와”(Okinawa, in Japan)
by using K-C translation patterns. Most non-
CJK NEs can be translated correctly by us-
ing the K-E translation patterns. For exam-
ple, “제¨퍼 카프‹아 ”(Jennifer Capriati),
“˜저”(anthrax), and “광  ”(mad cow dis-
ease) can be extracted from Google snippets ef-
fectively by our translation patterns.
Although our method translates some NEs
into English flrst and then into Chinese in an
indirect manner, it is very efiective because the
non-CJK NEs in Korean are mainly from En-
glish. In fact, 16 of the 17 NEs can be suc-
cessfully translated by the two stage translation
method that employs two types of translation
patterns: K-E and E-C.
5.3 Efiectiveness
Analysis of NET
As shown in Table 2, for topics with NEs, the
rigid MAP of our method is very close to that
of Chinese monolingual IR, while the relax MAP
of our method is even better than that of Chi-
nese monolingual IR. We observe that 26 of the
31 NEs in the topics are successfully translated
into Chinese. These results demonstrate that
our hybrid method comprising the extended dic-
tionaries and translation patterns can deal with
Korean-Chinese NE translation efiectively and
Table 2: Results on Topics with NEs
Run MAP RecallRigid Relax Rigid Relax
NET 0.2700 0.3385 0.7565 0.7578
Chinese 0.2746 0.3273 0.7922 0.7846
improve the performance of IR substantially.
Note that, our method can extract more pos-
sible Chinese translations, which is similar to
query expansion. For non-CJK NEs, there may
existseveralChinesetransliterationsthatareac-
tually used in Chinese, especially for the per-
son names. Take “Tito”for example; its six
common Chinese transliterations, namely, “Œ
托”(di-tuo), “ 托”(di-tuo), “帝托”(di-tuo), “—
托”(ti-tuo), and “˜托”(di-tuo)can be extracted.
With our method, the rigid MAP of this topic
achieves 0.8361, which is much better than that
of the same topic in the Chinese monolingual run
(0.4459) because the Chinese topic has only one
transliteration “帝托”(di-tuo). This is the rea-
son that our method outperforms the Chinese
monolingual run in topics with NEs.
5.4 Error
Analysis
NEs that cannot be translated correctly can
be divided into two categories. The flrst con-
tains names not selected as NE candidates. The
Japanese person name “˜ currency1‹” (Alberto Fu-
jimori, Peru’s ex-president) is in this category.
For the name “˜ currency1‹” (Fujimori), the flrst
two characters “˜ ” (hind legs) and the last
two characters “currency1‹” (proflting) are all Sino-
Korean words, so it is regarded as a compound
word, not an NE. The other category contains
names with few relevant web pages, like the non-
CJK names “안 ¨오 디” (Antonio Toddy).
The other problem is that our method can
translate the Korean NEs into correct Chinese
translations, but not the translation used in the
CIRB 4.0 news collection. For example, “ 르⁄
크” (Kursk) is translated into “«爾fl克” (Ku-
er-si-ke) correctly, but only the transliteration
“ fl克” (Ke-si-ke) is used in CIRB 4.0. In this
situation, the extracted translation cannot im-
prove the performance of the KCIR.
287
Table 3: Results on Topics with Person Names
Run MAP RecallRigid Relax Rigid Relax
NET 0.2730 0.3274 0.7146 0.7299
Chinese 0.2575 0.3169 0.7513 0.7708
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have considered the di–cul-
ties that arise in translating NEs from Korean
to Chinese for IR. We propose a hybrid method
for K-C NET that exploits an extended dictio-
narie containing Wikipedia and the Naver peo-
ple search engine, combined with the translation
patterns automatically learned from the search
results of the Google search engine. To eval-
uate our method, we use the topics and doc-
ument collection of the NTCIR-5 CLIR task.
Our method’s performance on KCIR is over flve
times better than that of the baseline conflgura-
tion with only an o†ine dictionary-based trans-
lation module. Moreover, its overall MAP score
is up to 0.2986, and its MAP on the NE topics
is up to 0.3385 which is even better than that
of the Chinese monolingual IR system. The pro-
posed method can translate NEs that originated
in the Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and non-
CJK languages and improve the performance of
KCIR substantially. Our NET method is not
language-speciflc; therefore, it can be applied to
the other CLIR systems beside K-C IR.
References
Yaser Al-Onaizan and Kevin Knight. 2002. Trans-
lating named entities using monolingual and bilin-
gual resources. Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association of Computational Lin-
guistics (ACL), pages 400–408.
Hsin-Hsi Chen, Sheng-Jie Huang, Yung-Wei Ding,
and Shih-Cbung Tsai. 1998. Proper name transla-
tion in cross-language information retrieval. Pro-
ceedings of 17th COLING and 36th ACL, pages
232–236.
Kazuaki Kishida, Kuang hua Chen, Sukhoon Lee,
Kazuko Kuriyama, Noriko Kando, Hsin-Hsi Chen,
and Sung Hyon Myaeng. 2005. Overview of clir
task at the flfth ntcir workshop. Proceedings of the
Fifth NTCIR Workshop.
Juhee Lee. 2003. Loadword phonology revisted: Im-
plications of richness of the base for the analysis
of loanwords input. Explorations in Korean Lan-
guage and Linguistics, pages 361–375.
Mira Oh. 2003. English fricatives in loanword adap-
tion. Explorations in Korean Language and Lin-
guistics, pages 471–487.
S.E. Robertson, S. Walker, MM Beaulieu, M. Gat-
ford, and A. Payne. 1996. Okapi at trec-4. Pro-
ceedings of the Fourth Text Retrieval Conference,
pages 73–97.
Tefko Saracevic, Paul Kantor, Alice Y. Chamis, and
Donna Trivison. 1988. A study of information
seeking and retrieving. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 39(3):161–176.
L. Yang, D. Ji, and M. Leong. 2007. Docu-
ment reranking by term distribution and maxi-
mal marginal relevance for chinese information re-
trieval. Information Processing and Management:
an International Journal, 43(2):315–326.
288

