A Co-occurrence Graph-based Approach for
Personal Name Alias Extraction from Anchor Texts
Danushka Bollegala ⁄
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1, Hongo, Tokyo,
113-8656, Japan
danushka@mi.ci.i.u-
tokyo.ac.jp
Yutaka Matsuo
National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and
Technology
1-18-13, Sotokanda, Tokyo,
101-0021, Japan
y.matsuo@aist.go.jp
Mitsuru Ishizuka
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1, Hongo, Tokyo,
113-8656, Japan
ishizuka@i.u-
tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract
A person may have multiple name aliases
on the Web. Identifying aliases of a name
is important for various tasks such as in-
formation retrieval, sentiment analysis and
name disambiguation. We introduce the no-
tion of a word co-occurrence graph to rep-
resent the mutual relations between words
that appear in anchor texts. Words in an-
chor texts are represented as nodes in the
co-occurrence graph and an edge is formed
between nodes which link to the same url.
For a given personal name, its neighboring
nodes in the graph are considered as can-
didates of its aliases. We formalize alias
identification as a problem of ranking nodes
in this graph with respect to a given name.
We integrate various ranking scores through
support vector machines to leverage a robust
ranking function and use it to extract aliases
for a given name. Experimental results on a
dataset of Japanese celebrities show that the
proposed method outperforms all baselines,
displaying a MRR score of 0:562.
1 Introduction
Searching for information about people in the Web is
one of the most common activities of Internet users.
Around 30% of search engine queries include person
names (Guha and Garg, 2004). However, an indi-
vidual might have multiple nicknames or aliases on
⁄Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of
Science (JSPS)
the Web. For example, the famous Japanese major
league baseball player Hideki Matsui is often called
as Godzilla in web contents. Identifying aliases of
a name is important in various tasks such as infor-
mation retrieval (Salton and McGill, 1986), senti-
ment analysis (Turney, 2002) and name disambigua-
tion (Bekkerman and McCallum, 2005).
In information retrieval, to improve recall of a
web search on a person name, a search engine can
automatically expand the query using aliases of the
name. In our previous example, a user who searches
for Hideki Matsui might also be interested in re-
trieving documents in which Matsui is referred to
as Godzilla. People use different aliases when ex-
pressing their opinions about an entity. By aggre-
gating texts written on an individual that use various
aliases, a sentiment analysis system can make an in-
formed judgment on the sentiment. Name disam-
biguation focuses on identifying different individu-
als with the same name. For example, for the name
Jim Clark, aside from the two most popular name-
sakes the formula-one racing champion and the
founder of Netscape at least ten different people are
listed among the top 100 results returned by Google
for the name. Although namesakes have identical
names, their nicknames usually differ. Therefore, a
name disambiguation algorithm can benefit from the
knowledge related to name aliases.
We propose an alias extraction method that ex-
ploits anchor texts and the links indicated by the
anchor texts. Link structure has been studied
extensively in information retrieval and has been
found to be useful in various tasks such as rank-
ing of web pages, identification of hub-authority
865

