BookReviews
TheTextMiningHandbook:
AdvancedApproachestoAnalyzingUnstructuredData
RonenFeldmanandJamesSanger
(Bar-Ilan University and ABS Ventures)
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 2007, xii+410 pp; hardbound,
ISBN 0-521-83657-3, $70.00
Reviewed by
Rada Mihalcea
University of North Texas
Text mining is the process of discovering information in large text collections, and
automatically identifying interesting patterns and relationships in textual data. It is
a relatively new research area, which has recently raised much interest among the
researchandindustrycommunities,mainlyduetothecontinuouslyincreasingamount
of information available on the Web and elsewhere. Text mining is a highly interdisci-
plinaryresearcharea,bringingtogetherresearchinsightsfromtheﬁeldsofdatamining,
naturallanguageprocessing,machinelearning,andinformationretrieval.Inparticular,
text mining is closely related to the older area of data mining, which targets the extrac-
tionofinterestinginformationfromdatarecords,althoughtextminingisallegedlymore
difﬁcult,asthesourcedataconsistsofunstructuredcollectionsofdocumentsratherthan
structured databases.
The book by Feldman and Sanger is a thorough introduction to text mining, cov-
ering the general architecture of text mining systems, along with the main techniques
used by such systems. It addresses both the theory and practice of text mining, and it
illustratesthedifferenttechniqueswithreal-worldscenariosandpracticalapplications.
It is particularly relevant for students and professional practitioners, being structured
as a self-contained handbook that does not require previous experience in any of the
research ﬁelds involved.
The book is structured into twelve chapters, which gradually introduce the area of
text mining and related topics, starting with an introduction to the task of text mining,
and ending with examples of practical applications fromthree different domains.
Theﬁrstchaptercanberegardedasanoverviewofthebook.Itstartsbydeﬁningthe
problem of text mining and the key elements in text mining: the document collections,
thedocumentfeatures(words,terms,andconcepts),andtheroleofbackgroundknowl-
edgeintextmining.Itthenbrieﬂytouchesuponthepossibleapplicationsoftextmining,
suchaspatterndiscoveryandtrendanalysis,andshortlydiscussestheinterfacelayerof
text mining systems. The second part of the chapter lays down the general architecture
of a text mining system, which also serves as a rough guide for the rest of the book, as
itdescribesthemaincomponentsofatextminingsystemthataredescribedindetailin
subsequent chapters.
Chapter 2 is one of the longest chapters in the book, and also one of the most
dense in terms of newly introduced concepts. Despite being a more difﬁcult read
compared to the other chapters in the book, I found it to be the most informative with
respect to operations speciﬁc to text mining. The chapter starts by deﬁning the core
text mining operations, including distributions, sets, and associations, and introduces
ComputationalLinguistics Volume34,Number1
the main techniques for isolating interesting patterns and analyzing trends over time.
The second part of the chapter overviews the role of background knowledge in
text mining. The authors describe several ontologies and lexicons, and show with
evidence from a real-world example (the FACT system they developed in the late
1990s) how background knowledge can be effectively integrated into text mining
systems. A shortcoming of this section is the interchangeable use of “domain ontol-
ogy” and “background knowledge,” which can be confusing for computational lin-
guists, who typically make a distinction between these terms. Finally, the third part
of the chapter brieﬂy describes query languages, which are later addressed in detail in
Chapter 9.
Chapter3ismeantasashortintroductiontotextpreprocessingtechniques,includ-
ing tokenization, tagging, and parsing. This chapter, as well as several of the following
chapters addressing text classiﬁcation and information extraction, were most likely
included in the book because of the authors’ intention to make the book self-contained
and appealing even for those with no background in computational linguistics.
Chapters 4 and 5 describe techniques for text classiﬁcation and clustering, which
are relevant to the selection of documents addressed by a text mining system. Chapter
4 describes the representation of documents for the purpose of text categorization,
and introduces several machine-learning algorithms, including decision trees, naive
Bayes, and SVMs, as well as committees of classiﬁers through bagging and boosting.
Chapter5introducesseveralclusteringalgorithms,includingagglomerativeclustering,
expectation maximization, and K-means, as well as techniques speciﬁc to clustering
textual data such as latent semantic analysis.
Thenextthreechapters,6,7,and8,addressthetaskofinformationextraction,which
isakeyelementinanytextminingsystem.Chapter6beginsbydeﬁningtheproblemof
information extraction, the architecture of a typical information extraction system, and
the main knowledge-based and structural approaches to information extraction. Chap-
ter7isdedicatedtoprobabilisticmodels,includingmaximumentropy,hiddenMarkov
models, and conditional random ﬁelds. Chapter 8 then describes text preprocessing
using these probabilistic models, including part-of-speech tagging, shallow parsing,
and named-entity tagging. The chapter also addresses bootstrapping techniques for
information extraction. One drawback of this section of the book is the fact that the
division of the material among these three chapters is not always very clear, and some
parts could have been organized differently. For instance, the probabilistic models and
their applications are split among Chapters 7and 8, although they could have been
combinedunderonechapter.Chapter8includesmaterialonbootstrappingapproaches
forinformationextraction,whichseemsunrelatedtotherestofthischapterandinstead
could have been included in Chapter 6.
Chapter 9 addresses techniques for interfacing with text mining systems, includ-
ing browsing and displaying of distributions, associations, and hierarchies, as well as
query languages and query reﬁnement. Visualization techniques are then addressed in
Chapter10,whichdescribesvisualinterfacestotextminingsystems,suchasassociation
graphs,histograms,andself-organizingmaps.Thechapterisrichinillustrations,which
contributetoabetterunderstandingofthedifferencesbetweenthevariousvisualization
methods.
The relationships discovered by a text mining system can be further explored by
using techniques for link analysis, which are described in Chapter 11. The chapter
begins with a brief introduction to graph theory, followed by a description of several
graph centrality methods and algorithms for network partitioning. The chapter also
provides pointers to software packages for link analysis.
126
BookReviews
Finally,Chapter12illustratestheapplicationofthetextminingconceptsintroduced
in the book to three practical text mining problems: industry literature mining, patent
analysis, and protein interactions. By showing examples of concrete applications, the
authors demonstrate the applicability of the text mining theory introduced in the book
to practical real-world scenarios.
Overall, The Text Mining Handbook is a good introduction to text mining, written by
leadingexpertsintheﬁeld.Thebookiswellwrittenandaddressesboththetheoryand
practiceoftextmining,whichmakesitappealingforresearchersandpractitionersalike.
By being self-contained, with several chapters addressing in detail the main topics
relevant to text mining, the book is highly recommended to those who would like to
start delving into the area of text mining without having any previous background
in computational linguistics. Although experts in computational linguistics will most
likelyﬁndthattheycansafelyskipoverseveralofthetextprocessingchapters(e.g.,the
introductory chapters on text preprocessing, or the chapters on text classiﬁcation and
informationextraction),theywillcertainlyﬁndalotofvalueinthechaptersaddressing
the speciﬁc task of text mining (mainly Chapters 2, 10, 11, and 12).
Rada MihalceaisanAssistantProfessorofComputerScienceattheUniversityofNorthTexas.Her
research interests are in lexical semantics, multilingual natural language processing, minimally
supervisednaturallanguagelearning,andgraph-basedalgorithmsfornaturallanguageprocess-
ing. She served as the president of the ACL Special Interest Group on the Lexicon (SIGLEX)
from 2004 to 2007, and she is currently a board member of the ACL Special Interest Group on
Natural Language Learning (SIGNLL). Mihalcea’s address is: Department of Computer Science,
Universityof NorthTexas, P.O.Box311366, Denton,TX,76203; e-mail:rada@cs.unt.edu.
127


