Prepositionsin Applications:A Surveyand
Introductiontothe SpecialIssue
TimothyBaldwin
UniversityofMelbourne,Australia
ValiaKordoni
DFKIGmbHandSaarlandUniversity,
Germany
AlineVillavicencio
FederalUniversityofRioGrandedoSul,
Brazil,andUniversityofBath,UK
1. Introduction
Prepositions
1
—as well as prepositional phrases (PPs) and markers of various sorts—
haveamixedhistoryincomputationallinguistics(CL),aswellasrelatedﬁeldssuchas
artiﬁcial intelligence, information retrieval (IR), and computational psycholinguistics:
On the one hand they have been championed as being vital to precise language un-
derstanding (e.g., in information extraction), and on the other they have been ignored
on the grounds of being syntactically promiscuous and semantically vacuous, and
relegatedtotheignominiousrankof“stopword”(e.g.,intextclassiﬁcationandIR).
AlthoughNLPingeneralhasbeneﬁttedfromadvancesinthoseareaswhereprepo-
sitionshavereceivedattention,therearestillmanyissuestobeaddressed.Forexample,
in machine translation, generating a preposition (or “case marker” in languages such
as Japanese) incorrectly inthe target language can lead to critical semantic divergences
over the source language string. Equivalently in information retrieval and information
extraction,itwouldseemdesirabletobeabletopredictthatbookonNLPandbookabout
NLPmeanlargelythesamething,butparanoidaboutdrugsandparanoidondrugssuggest
verydifferentthings.
Prepositions areoftenamong themost frequentwords inalanguage. Forexample,
based on the British National Corpus (BNC; Burnard 2000), four out of the top-ten
most-frequent words in English are prepositions (of, to, in,andfor). In terms of both
parsingandgeneration,therefore,accuratemodelsofprepositionusageareessentialto
avoidrepeatedlymakingerrors.Despitetheirfrequency,however,theyarenotoriously
difﬁculttomaster,evenforhumans(Chodorow,Tetreault,andHan2007).Forexample,
Lindstromberg (2001) estimates that less than 10% of upper-level English as a Second
1 OurdiscussionwillfocusprimarilyonprepositionsinEnglish,butmanyofthecommentswemake
applyequallytoadpositions(prepositionsandpostpositions)andcasemarkersinvariouslanguages.For
deﬁnitionsandgeneraldiscussionofprepositionsinEnglishandotherlanguages,wereferthereaderto
Lindstromberg(1998),HuddlestonandPullum(2002),andCh´eliz(2002),interalia.
Submissionreceived:9December2008;revisedsubmissionreceived:17January2009;acceptedfor
publication:17January2009.
©2009AssociationforComputationalLinguistics
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Language(ESL)studentscanuseandunderstandprepositionscorrectly,andIzumietal.
(2003) reported error rates of English preposition usage by Japanese speakers of up
to10%.
The purpose of this special issue is to showcase recent research on prepositions
acrossthespectrumofcomputationallinguistics,focusingoncomputationalsyntaxand
semantics. More importantly, however, we hope to reignite interest in the systematic
treatment of prepositions in applications. To this end, this article is intended to present
a cross-section view of research on prepositions and their use in NLP applications. We
begin by outlining the syntax of prepositions and its relevance to NLP applications,
focusingonPPattachmentandprepositionsinmultiwordexpressions(Section2).Next,
we discuss formal and lexical semantic aspects of prepositions, and again their rele-
vancetoNLPapplications(Section3),anddescribeinstancesofappliedresearchwhere
prepositionshavefeaturedprominently(Section4).Finally,weoutlinethecontributions
ofthepapersincludedinthisspecialissue(Section5)andconcludewithadiscussionof
researchareasrelevanttoprepositionswhichwebelieveareripeforfurtherexploration
(Section6).
2. Syntax
Therehasbeenatendencyforprepositionstobelargelyignoredintheareaofsyntactic
researchas“anannoyinglittlesurfacepeculiarity”(Jackendoff1973,page345).Incom-
putational terms, the two most important syntactic considerations with prepositions
are:(1)selection(Fillmore1968;Bennett1975;Tseng2000;Kracht2003),and(2)valence
(HuddlestonandPullum2002).
Selection is the property of a preposition being subcategorized/speciﬁed by the
governor (usually a verb) as part of its argument structure. An example of a selected
preposition iswithindispensewithintroductions, whereintroductionsis the object of the
verbdispense,butmustberealizedinaprepositionalphraseheadedbywith(c.f.*dispense
introductions).Conventionally,selectedprepositionsarespeciﬁeduniquely(e.g.,dispense
with) or as well-deﬁned clusters (e.g., chuckleover/at), and have bleached semantics.
Selected prepositions contrast with unselected prepositions, which do not form part
of the argument structure of a governor and do have semantic import (e.g., livein
Japan). Unsurprisingly, there is not a strict dichotomy between selected and unselected
prepositions (Tseng 2000). For example, in the case of relyonKim, on is speciﬁed in
theargumentstructureofrelybutpreservesitsdirectionalsemantics;similarly,inputit
down,putrequiresalocativeadjunct(c.f.*putit)butisentirelyagnosticastoitsidentity,
andtheprepositionissemanticallytransparent.
Preposition selection is important in any NLP application that operates at the
syntax–semantics interface, that is,that overtly translates surface strings onto semantic
representations,orviceversa(e.g.,informationextractionormachinetranslationusing
some form of interlingua). It forms a core component of subcategorization learning
(Manning1993;BriscoeandCarroll1997;Korhonen2002),andposesconsiderablechal-
lengeswhendevelopinglanguageresourceswithsyntactico-semanticmark-up(Kipper,
Snyder,andPalmer2004).
Prepositions can occur with either intransitive or transitive valence. Intransitive
prepositions (often referred to as “particles”) are valence-saturated, and as such do not
take arguments. They occur most commonly as: (a) components of larger multiword
expressions (e.g., verb particle constructions, such aspickitup), (b) copular predicates
(e.g.,thedoctorisin),or(c)prenominalmodiﬁers(e.g.,anoffday).Transitiveprepositions,
120
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
on the other hand, select for (usually noun phrase) complements to form PPs (e.g.,at
home).Thebareterm“preposition”traditionallyreferstoatransitivepreposition,butin
thisarticleisusedasacatch-allforprepositionsofallvalences.
Preposition valence has received relatively little direct exposure in the NLP liter-
ature but has been a latent feature of all work on part of speech (POS) tagging and
parsing over the Penn Treebank (Marcus, Santorini, and Marcinkiewicz 1993), as the
PennPOStagsetdistinguishesbetweentransitiveprepositions(IN),selectedintransitive
prepositions (RP), and unselected intransitive prepositions (RB, along with a range of
other adverbials).
2
There have been only isolated cases of research where a dedicated
approach has been used to distinguish between these three sub-usages, in the interests
ofoptimizingoverallPOStaggingorparsingperformance(Shaked1993;Toutanovaand
Manning2000;KleinandManning2003;MacKinlayandBaldwin2005).
Two large areas of research on the syntactic aspects of prepositions are (a) PP-
attachment and (b) prepositions in multiword expressions, which are discussed in the
following sections. Although this article will focus largely on the syntax of preposi-
tions in English, prepositions in other languages naturally have their own challenges.
Notable examples which have been the target of research in computational linguistics
areadpositionsinEstonian(Muischnek,M¨u¨urisep,andPuolakainen2005),adpositions
in Finnish (Lestrade 2006), short and long prepositions in Polish (Tseng 2004), and the
French`aandde(Abeill´eetal.2003).
2.1PP Attachment
PP attachment is the task of ﬁnding the governor for a given PP. For example, in the
followingsentence:
(1) Kimeatspizzawithchopsticks
there is syntactic ambiguity, with the PPwithchopsticksbeing governed by either the
nounpizza(i.e., as part of the NPpizzawithchopsticks, as indicated in Example (2)), or
theverbeats(i.e.,asamodiﬁeroftheverb,asindicatedinExample(3)).
(2) S
NP
N
Kim
VP
V
eats
NP
N
pizza
PP
P
with
NP
N
chopsticks
2 ItalsoincludestheenigmaticTOtag,whichisexclusivelyusedforoccurrencesofto,overallinﬁnitive,
transitivepreposition,andintransitiveprepositionusages.
121
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
(3) S
NP
N
Kim
VP
V
eats
NP
N
pizza
PP
P
with
NP
N
chopsticks
Of these, the latter case of verb attachment (i.e., Example (3)) is, of course, the correct
analysis.
Naturally the number of PP contexts with attachment ambiguity is theoretically
unbounded. One special case of note is a sequence of PPs such as Kim eats pizza
withchopsticksonWednesdaysatPapaGino’s,wherethenumberofdiscreteanalysesfora
sequenceofnPPsisdeﬁnedbythecorrespondingCatalannumberC
n
(ChurchandPatil
1982).ThebulkofPPattachmentresearch,however,hasfocusedexclusivelyonthecase
ofasinglePPoccurringimmediatelyafteranNP,whichinturnisimmediatelypreceded
byaverb.Assuch,wewillfocusourdiscussionpredominantlyonthissyntacticcontext.
Tosimplifydiscussion,wewillrefertotheverbasv,theheadnounoftheimmediately
proceeding NP as n
1, the preposition as p, and the head noun of the NP object of
the preposition as n
2
. Returning to our earlier example, the corresponding 4-tuple is
〈eat
v,pizza
n
1,with
p,chopsticks
n
2
〉.
The high degree of interest in PP attachment stems from it being a common phe-
nomenon when parsing languages such as English, and hence a major cause of parser
errors (Lin 2003). As such, it has implications for any task requiring full syntactic
analysis or a notion of constituency, such as prosodic phrasing (van Herwijnen et al.2003). Languages other than English with PP attachment ambiguity which have been
the target of research include Dutch (van Herwijnen et al. 2003), French (Gaussier and
Cancedda2001;GalaandLafourcade2005),German(Hartrumpf1999;Volk2001,2003;
Foth and Menzel 2006), Spanish (Calvo, Gelbukh, and Kilgarriff 2005), and Swedish
(Kokkinakis2000;Aasa2004;Volk2006).
PPattachmentresearchhasundergoneanumberofsigniﬁcantparadigmshiftsover
thecourseofthelastthreedecades,andbeenthetargetofinterestoftheoreticalsyntax,
AI,psycholinguistics,statisticalNLP,andstatisticalparsing.
EarlyresearchonPPattachmentfocusedonthedevelopmentofheuristicsintended
to model human processing strategies, based on analysis of the competing parse trees
independent of lexical or discourse context (Frazier 1979; Sch¨utze 1995). For example,
Minimal Attachment was the strategy of choosing the attachment site which “mini-
mizes” the parse tree, as calculated by its node membership; assuming the parse trees
providedforExample(1),thiswouldbeunabletodisambiguate betweenExamples(2)
and (3) as they both contain the same number of nodes. Late Attachment, on the other
hand, was the strategy of attaching “low” in the parse tree, corresponding to Exam-
ple (2). Ford, Bresnan, and Kaplan (1982) proposed an alternative heuristic strategy,
based on the existence ofpin a subcategorization frame forv. In later research, Pereira
(1985)describedamethodforincorporatingRightAssociationandMinimalAttachment
122
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
into a shift-reduce parser, and Whittemore and Ferrara (1990) developed a rule-based
algorithm to combine various attachment preferences on the basis of empirical evalua-
tionofthepredictivepowerofeach.
Syntactic preferences were of course a blunt instrument in dealing with PP attach-
ment, and largely ineffectual in predicting the difference in PP attachment between
Kimeatspizzawithchopsticks(verb attachment) andKimeatspizzawithanchovies(noun
attachment), for example. This led to a shift away from syntactic methods in the 1980s
towardsAI-inspiredtechniqueswhichusedworldknowledgetoresolvePPattachment
ambiguity. In the case of Example (1), for example, the knowledge thatchopsticksare
aneatingimplementwouldsuggestapreferenceforverbattachment,andsimilarlythe
knowledgethattheyarenotafoodstuffwouldsuggestadispreferencefornounattach-
ment.Wilks,Huang,andFass(1985)attemptedtocapturethistypeofworldknowledge
using hand-coded “preferential semantics” of each of v, n
1, p,andn
2
.Dahlgrenand
McDowell (1986) simpliﬁed this analysis to use only p and n
2, still in the form of
hand-coded rules. Hirst (1987) used his model of “commonsense semantics” to resolve
PP attachment ambiguity, based on verb-guided preferences (i.e., valence properties
of the verb) and plausibility relative to a knowledge base. In this same vein, Jensen
and Binot (1987) used the dictionary deﬁnitions ofvandn
2
as a “knowledge base” to
resolve PP attachment based on approximate reasoning, for example, by determining
thatchopsticksisaninstrumentwhichiscompatiblewitheat.
Inparallel,intheareaofpsycholinguistics,AltmannandSteedman(1988)provided
experimental evidence to suggest that PP attachment resolution interacts dynamically
with discourse context, and that ambiguity is resolved on the basis of the interdepen-
dence between structure and the mental representation of that context. This suggested
that computational research on PP attachment resolution needed to take into account
the discourse context, in addition to syntax and world knowledge. Spivey-Knowlton
and Sedivy (1995) later used psycholinguistic experiments to demonstrate that verb-
speciﬁc attachment properties and NP deﬁniteness both play important roles in the
humanprocessingofPPattachment.Importantly,thisworkmotivatedtheneedforverb
classestoresolvePPattachmentambiguity.
The next signiﬁcant shift in NLP research on PP attachment was brought about by
Hindle and Rooth (1993), who were the harbingers of statistical NLP and large-scale
empiricalevaluation.HindleandRoothchallengedtheprevailingviewatthetimethat
lexicalsemanticsand/ordiscoursemodelingwereneededtoresolvePPattachment,in
proposing a distributional approach, based simply on estimation of the probability of
pattaching high or low givenvandn
1
(ignoringn
2
). The method uses unambiguous
cases of PP attachment (e.g., cases ofn
1
being a pronoun [high attachment], or the PP
post-modifyingn
1
in subject position [low attachment]) to derive smoothed estimates
of Pr
high
(p|v), Pr
high
(NULL|n) (i.e., the probability of n not being post-modiﬁed by
a PP), and Pr
low
(p|n), which then form the basis of Pr
high
(p|v,n) and Pr
low
(p|v,n),
respectively.Theproposedmethodwassigniﬁcantindemonstratingtheeffectivenessof
simple co-occurrence probabilities, without explicit semantics or discourse processing,
andalsoinitsabilitytooperatewithoutexplicitlyannotatedtrainingdata.
Resnik and Hearst (1993) observed that PP attachment preferences are also condi-
tioned on the semantics of the noun object of the preposition in the PP, as can be seen
in our earlier example ofKimeatspizzawithchopsticks/anchovieswherechopsticksleads
to verb attachment andanchoviesto noun attachment. Although they were unable to
come up with a model which was empirically superior to existing methods which did
not represent the semantics of the noun object, this paved the way for a new wave of
researchusingthefull4-tupleof 〈v,n
1,p,n
2
〉.
123
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
The ﬁrst to successfully apply the full 4-tuple were Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and
Roukos (1994), who in the process established a benchmark PP attachment data set
upon which most of the subsequent research has been based. The data set, colloquially
known as the“RRR” data set,wasautomatically extracted fromtheWall StreetJournal
section of the Penn Treebank, and is made up of 20,801 training and 3,097 test 4-tuples
of type 〈v,n
1,p,n
2
〉, each of which is annotated with a binary label for verb or noun
attachment.
3
Also of signiﬁcance was the fact that Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos
were able to come up with a “class” representation for words, based on distributional
similarity,thatoutperformedasimpleword-basedmodel.
The general framework established by Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos (1994),
and the RRR data set, deﬁned the task of PP attachment for over a decade. It has been
tackledusingavarietyofsmoothingmethodsandmachinelearningalgorithms,includ-
ing backed-off estimation (Collins and Brooks 1995), instance-based learning (Zavrel,
Daelemans, and Veenstra 1997; Zhao and Lin 2004), log-linear models (Franz 1996),
maximum entropy learning (Ratnaparkhi, Reynar, and Roukos 1994), decision trees
(Merlo,Crocker,andBerthouzoz1997),neuralnetworks(Sopena,Lloberas,andMoliner
1998; Alegre, Sopena, and Lloberas 1999), and boosting (Abney, Schapire, and Singer
1999). In addition to the four lexical and class-based features provided by the 4-tuple
〈v,n
1,p,n
2
〉, researchers have used noun deﬁniteness, distributional similarity, noun
number,subcategorizationcategories,wordproximityincorpusdata,andPPsemantic
class(StetinaandNagao1997;YehandVilain1998;PantelandLin2000;Volk2002).The
empirical benchmark for the data set was achieved by Stetina and Nagao (1997), who
usedWordNet(Fellbaum1998)toexplicitlymodelverbandnounsemantics.
Ina novel approach tothe task, Schwartz, Aikawa, and Quirk (2003) observed that
Japanese translations of English verb and noun attachment involve distinct construc-
tions.ThisallowedthemtoautomaticallyidentifyinstancesofPPattachmentambiguity
in a parallel English–Japanese corpus, complete with attachment information. They
usedthisdatatodisambiguatePPattachmentinEnglishinputs,anddemonstratedthat,
thequalityofEnglish–Japanesemachinetranslationimprovedsigniﬁcantlyasaresult.
Morerecently,AttererandSch¨utze(2007)challengedthereal-worldutilityofmeth-
ods based on the RRR data set, on the grounds that it is based on the availability of a
gold-standard parse tree for a given input. They proposed that, instead, PPattachment
be evaluated as a means of post-processing over the raw output of an actual parser,
and produced results to indicate: (a) that a state-of-the-art parser (Bikel 2004) does
remarkably well at PP attachment without a dedicated PP attachment module; but
also (b) that post-processing based on a range of methods developed over the RRR
data set (Collins and Brooks 1995; Toutanova, Manning, and Ng 2004; Olteanu and
Moldovan 2005) generally improves parser accuracy. In addition, they developed a
variantoftheRRRdataset(RRR-sent)whichcontainsfullsententialcontextsofpossible
PPattachmentambiguity.OtherswhohavesuccessfullybuiltPPre-attachmentmodels
for speciﬁc parsers are Olteanu (2004) and Foth and Menzel (2006). Agirre, Baldwin,
and Martinez (2008) used the evaluation methodology of Atterer and Sch¨utze (2007) to
conﬁrm the ﬁnding from the original RRR data set that lexical semantics (in various
guises)canenhancePPattachmentaccuracyrelativetoabaselineparser.Aspartofthis
effort,theydevelopedastandardizeddatasetforexplorationoftheinteractionbetween
lexicalsemanticsandparsing/PPattachmentaccuracy.
3 Becauseitwasautomaticallyextracted,theRRRdatasetisnotoriouslynoisy.Forinstance,Panteland
Lin(2000)observedthat133tuplescontaintheaseithern
1
orn
2
.
124
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
One signiﬁcant variation on the classic binary PP attachment task which attempts
togeneratearichersemanticcharacterisation ofthePPistheworkofMerlo(2003)and
Merlo and Esteve Ferrer (2006), who included classiﬁcation of the PP as an argument
or adjunct, making for a four-way classiﬁcation task. In this context, they found that
PP attachment resolution for argument PPs is considerably easier than is the case for
adjunctPPs.
Returning to our observation that PP attachment can occur in multiple syntactic
conﬁgurations, Merlo, Crocker, and Berthouzoz (1997) applied backed-off estimation
to the problem of multiple PP attachment, in the form of 14 discrete syntactic conﬁg-
urations. Unsurprisingly, they found the task considerably harder than the basic V NP
PPcase, due to increased ambiguity and data sparseness. Mitchell (2004) similarly per-
formed an extensive analysis of the Penn Treebank to investigate the different contexts
PP attachment ambiguities occur in, and the relative ability of different PP attachment
methodstodisambiguateeach.
There have also been domain-speciﬁc methods proposed for PP attachment, for
example, in the area of biomedicine (Hahn, Romacker, and Schulz 2002; Pustejovsky
etal.2002;Leroy,Chen,andMartinez2003;SchumanandBergler2006).
2.2The Syntax of Prepositional MultiwordExpressions
Prepositions are also often found as part of multiword expressions (MWEs), such as
verb-particle constructions (breakdown), prepositional verbs (relyon), determinerless
PPs (inhospital), complex prepositions (bymeansof) and compound nominals (affairs
ofstate). MWEs are lexical items which are composed of more than one word and are
lexically, syntactically, semantically, pragmatically, and/or statistically idiosyncratic in
some way (Sag et al. 2002). In this section, we present a brief overview of the syntax
of the key prepositional MWEs in English, and discuss a cross-section of some of the
recentresearchdoneinthearea.
Prepositional MWEs span the full spectrum of morphosyntactic variation. Some
complex prepositions undergo no inﬂection, internal modiﬁcation, or word order vari-
ation (e.g., inadditionto) and are best analyzed as “words with spaces” (Sag et al.2002). Others optionally allow internal modiﬁcation (e.g.,with[due/particular/special/...]
regardto) or determiner insertion (e.g.,on[the]topof) and are considered to be semi-
ﬁxed expressions (Villada Moir´on 2005). Compound nominals are similarly semi-ﬁxed
expressions, in that they have rigid constraints on word order and lexical composition,
butallowmorphologicalinﬂection(e.g.,part(s)ofspeech).
The three prepositional MWE types that cause the greatest syntactic problems in
English,intermsoftheirrelativefrequencyandtendencyforsyntacticvariation,are:
1. verb-particleconstructions(VPCs),wheretheverbselectsforan
intransitivepreposition(e.g.,chickenoutorhandin:Deh´eetal.[2002]);
2. prepositionalverbs(PVs),wheretheverbselectsforatransitive
preposition(e.g.,relyonorreferto:HuddlestonandPullum[2002]);
3. determinerlessPPs(PP–Ds),whereaPPismadeupofaprepositionand
singularnounwithoutadeterminer(e.g.,atschool,offscreen:Baldwinetal.
[2006]).
All three MWE types undergo limited syntactic variation (Sag et al. 2002). For exam-
ple, transitive verb particle constructions generally undergo the particle alternation,
125
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
whereby the particle may occur either adjacent to the verb (e.g.,tearuptheletter), or
be separated from the verb by the NP complement (e.g.,teartheletterup). Some VPCs
readily occur with both orders (liketearup), while others have a strong preference for
a particular order (e.g.,takeoff—under the interpretation of having the day off—tends
to occur in the particle-ﬁnal conﬁguration in usages such astakeFridayoff vs.?takeoff
Friday).
4
In addition, many VPCs undergo limited internal modiﬁcation by adverbials,
wheretheadverbpre-modiﬁestheparticle(e.g.,comestraightover).
The syntactic variability of prepositional verbs is more subtle. PVs occur in two
basic forms: (1) ﬁxed preposition PVs (e.g.,comeacross), where the verb and selected
preposition must be strictly adjacent; and (2) mobile preposition PVs (e.g., referto),
where the selected preposition is adjacent to the verb in the canonical word order, but
undergoes limited syntactic alternation. For example, mobile preposition PVs allow
limited coordination of PP objects (e.g., refertothebookandtotheDVD), and the NP
objectoftheselectedprepositioncanbepassivized(e.g.,thebooktheyreferredto).
EvensubtlerarethesyntacticeffectsobservedfordeterminerlessPPs.Thesingular
noun in the PP–D is often strictly countable (e.g., off screen, on break), resulting in
syntacticmarkednessas,withoutadeterminer,thenoundoesnotconstituteasaturated
NP. This in turn dictates the need for a dedicated analysis in a linguistically motivated
grammar in order to be able to avoid parse failures (Baldwin et al. 2004; van der Beek
2005).Additionally,thereisconsiderablevariationintheinternalmodiﬁabilityofdeter-
minerless PPs, with some not permitting any internal modiﬁcation (e.g.,ofcourse)and
othersallowingoptionalinternalmodiﬁcation(e.g.,atconsiderablelength).Therearealso,
however, cases of obligatory internal modiﬁcation (e.g.,atconsiderable/greatexpensevs.
*atexpense)andhighlyrestrictedinternalmodiﬁcation(e.g.,atlonglastvs.*atgreat/short
last).Balancingupthesedifferentpossibilitiesintermsofover-andundergenerationin
agrammarisfarfromtrivial(Baldwinetal.2006).
NaturallythereareotherprepositionalMWEtypesinlanguagesotherthanEnglish
with their own syntactic complexities. Notable examples to have received attention in
thecomputationallinguisticsliteratureareDutch“collocationalprepositionalphrases”
(VilladaMoir´on2005),Germancomplexprepositions(Trawi´nski2003;Trawinski,Sailer,
and Soehn 2006), German particle verbs (Schulte im Walde 2004; Rehbein and van
Genabith2006),andPolishpreposition–pronouncontractions(Trawi´nski2005,2006).
2.2.1PrepositionalMWEsinNLP.The syntactic variation of prepositional MWEs leads
to difﬁculties for NLP applications. To start with, there is the problem of identifying
their token occurrences, for example, for semantic indexing purposes. As with simplex
words, a given MWE may appear with different subcategorization frames (e.g.,giveup
vs. giveup[something]), but added to that, the order of the elements may be ﬂexible
or internally modiﬁed (see previous discussion), and some elements may be optional
(e.g., out in makeabigthing(out)of[something]). Additionally, they conspire with PP
attachmentambiguitytocompoundstructuralambiguity.Forexample,handthepaperin
todayis ambiguous between a V NP PP analysis ([
V
hand][
NP
thepaper][
PP
intoday]), a
VNPanalysis([
V
hand][
NP
thepaperintoday]), and a transitive VPC analysis ([
V
hand]
[
NP
thepaper][
P
in][
NP
today]);ofthese,theﬁnalanalysisis,ofcourse,correct.
4 Thequestionofwhetherornotaparticlecanbeseparatedfromtheverbdependsonfactorssuchasthe
degreeofbondingoftheparticlewiththeverb,thesizeoftheNP,andthetypeoftheNP,asdiscussedby
Wasow(2002).
126
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
Relatedtothisistheissueofresourcedevelopment,especiallylexicondevelopment
for linguistically motivated parsers. First, a representation must be arrived at which is
sufﬁcientlyexpressivetoencodethesyntacticsubtletiesofeachMWEinstance(Sagetal.
2002;Calzolarietal.2002;Copestakeetal.2002;Odijk2004).Second,thelexiconmustbe
populated in order to ensure adequate parser coverage over prepositional MWEs. Due
to the high productivity and domain speciﬁcity of prepositional MWEs, a number of
lexicalacquisitionapproacheshavebeendeveloped,usuallycustomizedtoaparticular
prepositionalMWEtypeinaspeciﬁclanguage.
For VPCs in English, for instance, Baldwin and Villavicencio (2002) focused on
theirautomaticextractionfromrawtextcorpora,onthebasisofaPOStagger,chunker,
and chunk grammar, and ﬁnally the combined output of the three along with various
linguistic and frequency features. Baldwin (2005a) expanded on this work to extract
VPCs complete with valence information, to produce a fully speciﬁed lexical item. In
both cases, it was found that 100% recall was extremely hard to achieve due to the
power-law distribution of VPC token frequencies in corpus data. That is, around half
of the VPC lexical items found in pre-existing lexical resources occurred in the BNC at
most2times.
Villavicencio (2005, 2006) took a different approach, in observing that VPCs occur
productively in semantically coherent clusters, based on (near-)synonymy of the head
verb (e.g., clear/clean/drainup and break/rip/cut/tearup). As a result, she expanded a
seedsetofVPCsbasedonclass-basedverbsemanticinformation,andusedWeb-based
statisticstoﬁlterfalsepositivesoutoftheresultantVPCcandidateset.
Li et al. (2003) looked at the task of VPC identiﬁcation rather than extraction,
namely, identifying each individual VPC token instance in corpus data, based on a
set of hand-crafted regular expressions. Although they report very high precision and
recall for their method, it has the obvious disadvantage that the regular expressions
must be manually encoded, and it is not clear that the proposed method is superior
to an off-the-shelf parser. Kim and Baldwin (2006, in press) attempted to automate
the process of identiﬁcation by post-processing the output of the RASP parser, and
demonstrated (a) that the RASP parser (Briscoe, Carroll, and Watson 2006) is highly
effective at VPC identiﬁcation, and (b) that the incorporation of lexicalized models of
selectionalpreferencescanleadtomodestimprovementsinparseraccuracy.
In terms of English PV extraction, Baldwin (2005b) proposed a method based on a
combination of statistical measures and linguistic diagnostics, and demonstrated that
the combination of statistics with linguistic diagnostics achieved the best extraction
performance.
Research on prepositional MWEs in languages other than English includes Krenn
and Evert (2001) and Evert and Krenn (2005) on the extraction of German PP–verb
collocations (which are similar to verbal idioms/verb–noun combinations in English
[Fazly, Cook, and Stevenson 2009]) based on a range of lexical association measures.
Pecina(2008)furtherextendedthisworkusingamuchbroadersetoflexicalassociation
measuresandclassiﬁercombination.LookingatGerman,D¨omgesetal.(2007)analyzed
theproductivityofPP–Dsheadedbyunter,andusedtheirresultstomotivateasyntactic
analysis of the phenomenon. For Dutch, van der Beek (2005) worked on the extraction
of PP–Ds from the output of a parser, once again using a range of statistical measures.
Sharoff (2004) described a semi-automatic approach to classifying prepositional MWEs
in Russian, based on statistical measures and manual ﬁltering using knowledge about
thestructureofRussianprepositionalphrases.
A recent development which we expect will further catalyze research on preposi-
tional (and general) MWE extraction was the release of a number of standardized data
127
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
sets for MWE extraction evaluation as part of an LREC 2008 Workshop. This includes
datasetsforEnglishVPCs(Baldwin2008)andGermanPP–verbs(Krenn2008).
3. Semantics
Therearethreediametricallyopposedviewstothesemanticsofprepositions:(1)prepo-
sitions are semantically vacuous and unworthy of semantic representation (a view
commonly subscribed to in the information retrieval community: Baeza-Yates and
Ribeiro-Neto[1999],Manning,Raghavan,andSch¨utze[2008]);(2)prepositionsemantics
isafunctionofthewordsthatselectthemandtheyinturnselect,suchthatitisimpos-
sible to devise a standalone semantic characterization of preposition semantics (Tseng
2000; Old 2003); and (3) prepositional semantics is complex but can be captured in a
standalone resource (Kipper, Dang, and Palmer 2000; Saint-Dizier and Vazquez 2001;
Litkowski and Hargraves 2005). Kipper, Snyder, and Palmer (2004, page 23) elegantly
summarized this third position as “it is precisely because the preposition–semantics
relationship is so complex that properly accounting for it will lead to a more robust
natural language resource.” Turning the clock back 16 years, Zelinski-Wibbelt (1993,
page 1) observed that “we are now witnessing a veritable plethora of investigations
intothesemanticsofprepositionsemantics”andspeculatedthat“thetimehascometo
see how natural language processing (NLP) can beneﬁt from the insights of theoretical
linguistics.” Although these prognostications were perhaps overly optimistic at the
time,theyarenowbeingprogressivelyfulﬁlled.
In discussing preposition semantics, there is a basic distinction between composi-
tional (or regular/productive) and non-compositional (or irregular/collocational) se-
mantics. Preposition usages with compositional semantics transparently preserve the
standalone semantics of the preposition (e.g.,TheymetonFriday), whereas those with
non-compositional semantics involve some level of semantic specialization or diver-
gence from the standalone semantics (e.g., Theygotonfamously). In terms of formal
semantics, the complement vs. adjunct distinction
5
is also relevant for determining the
logicalformforagiveninput.
Subsequently, we review research on the formal and lexical semantics of preposi-
tions,andthesemanticsofprepositionalMWEs.
3.1 Formal
Semantic Approaches toPrepositions
Research ontheformalsemantics ofprepositions hasfocusedpredominantly ondevis-
ingrepresentationsfortemporal,spatial,andlocativeusages,thethreemostproductive
andcoherentclassesofprepositions.
Prepositions can be used in order to convey temporal information relevant to the
duration of a proposition. Normally, three types of information are identiﬁed: (1) the
duration of the preposition, (2) its duration relative to the time of reference of the dis-
course,and(3)itsabsolutelocationonthetimeaxis.Someprepositionsconveyallthree
types of information, and others convey only one. Within each information type, the
5 Intalkingaboutthecomplement/adjunctdistinction,weputasidethewell-knownissueofborderline
cases(Rauh1993),andignorelanguage-speciﬁcphenomenasuchasFunktionsverbgef¨uge,where
GermanPPscanalsooccurasinvariantsyntagmasinlightverbconstructions(e.g.,inBeschlagnehmen“to
occupy”)andthecomplement–adjunctdistinctiondoesnotapply.
128
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
semantic input of temporal prepositions can vary considerably: They can distinguish
between existential and universal quantiﬁcation over time, indicate whether or not the
extremesoftheperiodaretobeincluded,andmarkthemotionthroughtime.
Themainchallengeforformalapproachestothesemanticsoftemporalprepositions
iscomingupwitharepresentationwhichcanadequatelyencodethedifferentsemantics
of temporal prepositions (Bennett 1975; Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976; R¨ohrer 1977;
Kamp1981;Allen1984;Richardsetal.1989;Br´eeandSmit1986;DurrellandBr´ee1993).
Another concern has been the ability to support compositional semantic interpretation
of temporal PPs, with emphasis on their quantiﬁcational role. For English, Pratt and
Francez (1997), for instance, proposed generalized temporal quantiﬁers to represent
temporalNPs,temporalPPs,andsentences.
Withrespecttospatialsemantics,thefocusofresearchhasbeenondevisingformal
semantic representations that capture both the functional relationships between the
objects, and human interaction with those objects. Along these lines, Kelleher and
Costello (2009) propose computational models of spatial preposition semantics for use
invisuallysituateddialoguesystems.
Finally,withlocativeprepositions,formalsemanticapproacheshaveproposedthat
they should decompose into three semantic elements: a locative relation, a reference
entity,andaplacevalue.Eachlocativeexpression(e.g.,aPPorNP)isgenerallyassumed
to have a unique locative relation and place value. Thus, combinations of pure locative
relationmarkersandprepositionswhicharespeciﬁedforplacevaluesareruledout,and
noembeddedlocativerelationsareallowedinthesemanticstructureofasinglelocative
expression. Some locative prepositions are underspeciﬁed for a place value, however,
and thus are able to co-occur with a second preposition that speciﬁes a place value
(e.g., outfromunderthetable). The speciﬁc locative relation denoted by a preposition
is generally considered not to be speciﬁed in the lexicon, but instead to vary with
eventualitytypes.
Jørgensen and Lønning (2009) used the Minimal Recursion Semantics (MRS)
framework (Copestake et al. 2005) as the basis for a language-independent represen-
tation of semantics of locative prepositions. They applied the proposed representa-
tion to English and Norwegian locative prepositions, and demonstrated its utility for
Norwegian–English machine translation. Hellan and Beermann (2005) similarly used
theMRSframeworktocapturethelocativeandspatialsemanticsofNorwegianprepo-
sitions. Ramsay (2005) proposed a uniﬁed theory of preposition semantics, where the
semantics of temporal usages of prepositions are predicted naturally from abstract
relationaldeﬁnitions.Arsenijevi´c(2005)developedaformalsemanticanalysisofprepo-
sitions in terms of event structure and applied it to a natural language generation
task.
Denis, Kuhn, and Wechsler (2003) analyzed the syntactico-semantics of V-PP goal
motion complexes in English (e.g., Kimrantothelibrary), and developed an analysis
based on the conclusion that the preposition is often semantically rather than syn-
tactically determined. This lends support to arguments for a systematic account of
prepositionsemantics.
Kordoni(2003b,2003a,2006)focusedinsteadontheroleofprepositionsindiathesis
alternations, and proposed an MRSanalysis of indirect prepositional arguments based
on English, German, and Modern Greek data. Speciﬁcally, she showed that a robust
formal semantic framework like MRSprovides an appropriate theoretical basis for
a linguistically motivated account of indirect prepositional arguments, and also the
necessary formal generalizations for the analysis of such arguments in a multilingual
context(asaresultofMRSstructuresbeingeasilycomparableacrosslanguages).
129
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
3.2 Lexical
Semantic Resources forPrepositions
A number of lexical semantic resources have been developed speciﬁcally for prepo-
sitions,fourofwhichareoutlinedhere:(1)theEnglishLCSLexicon,(2)thePreposition
Project,(3)PrepNet,and(4)VerbNet.
TheEnglishLCSLexicon(Dorr1993,1997)usestheformalismofLexicalConceptual
Structure (based on work by Jackendoff [1983, 1990]
6
) to encode lexical knowledge
using a typed directed graph of semantic primitives and ﬁelds. In addition to a large
lexiconofverbs,itincludes165Englishprepositionsclassiﬁedinto122intransitiveand
375 transitive senses. For example, the LCSrepresentation for the directional sense of
up(asinupthestairs)is:
(4) (toward Loc (nil 2) (UP Loc (nil 2) (∗ Thing 6)))
wherethenumbersindicatethelogicalargumentsofthepredicates.Thisrepresentation
indicates that the logical subject of the PP (indexed by “2”; e.g.,thepianoinmovethe
pianoupthestairs) is relocated up in the direction of the logical argument (indexed by
“6”; e.g.,thestairsin our example), which is in turn a concrete thing. The LCSLexicon
wasdevelopedfromatheoreticalpointofviewandisn’tdirectlytiedtocorpususage.
The Preposition Project (Litkowski 2002; Litkowski and Hargraves 2005, 2006) is
an attempt to develop a comprehensive semantic database for English prepositions,
intended for NLP applications. The project took the New Oxford Dictionary of English
(Pearsall 1998) as its source of preposition sense deﬁnitions, which it then ﬁne-tuned
based on cross-comparison with both functionally tagged prepositions in FrameNet
(Baker, Fillmore, and Lowe 1998) and the account of preposition semantics in a de-
scriptive grammar of English (Quirk et al. 1985); it also draws partially on Dorr’s
LCSdeﬁnitions of prepositions. Importantly, the Preposition Project is building up a
signiﬁcant number of tagged preposition instances through analysis of the preposition
datainFrameNet,whichitthenusestocharacterizethenounselectionalpreferencesof
eachprepositionsenseandalsotheattachmentpropertiestoverbsofdifferenttypes.At
the time of writing, 673 preposition senses for 334 prepositions (mostly phrasal prepo-
sitions)havebeenannotated.Intandemwithdevelopingtype-levelsensedeﬁnitionsof
prepositions,thePrepositionProjecthassenseannotatedover27,000occurrencesofthe
56mostcommonprepositions,basedonfunctionallytaggedprepositionsinFrameNet.
To date, the primary application of the Preposition Project has been in a SemEval 2007
taskonthewordsensedisambiguationofprepositions(seeSection3.3).
PrepNet (Saint-Dizier and Vazquez 2001; Cannesson and Saint-Dizier 2002; Saint-
Dizier 2005, 2008) is an attempt to develop a compositional account of preposition
semanticswhichinterfaceswiththesemanticsofthepredicate(e.g.,verborpredicative
noun). Similarly to the English LCS Lexicon, it uses LCS as the descriptive language,
in conjunction with typed λ-calculus and underspeciﬁed representations. Noteworthy
elements of PrepNet are that it attempts to capture selectional constraints, metaphor-
ical sense extension, and complex arguments. PrepNet was originally developed over
French prepositions, but has since been applied to the analysis of instrumentals across
arangeoflanguages(Saint-Dizier2006b).
VerbNet (Kipper, Dang, and Palmer 2000; Kipper Schuler 2005) contains a shallow
hierarchy of 50 spatial prepositions, classiﬁed into ﬁve categories. The hierarchy is
6 SeeLevinandRappaport-Hovav(inpress)forarecentreviewofthisstyleofsemantics.
130
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
derived from pioneering work by Sp¨arck Jones and Boguraev (1987), which is in turn
derived from Wood (1979). The preposition sense inventory was used as the basis for
extending VerbNet and led to signiﬁcant redevelopment of the verb class set (Kipper,
Snyder, and Palmer 2004), in a poignant illustration of how preposition semantics
impingesonverbsemantics.
In other work, Sablayrolles (1995) classiﬁed 199 simple and complex spatial prepo-
sitions into 16 classes. Lersundi and Agirre (2003) applied a similar methodology to
Dorr and Habash (2002) in developing a multilingual sense inventory for Basque post-
positions and English and Spanish prepositions. Fort and Guillaume (2007) developed
a syntactico-semantic lexicon of French prepositions, partly based on PrepNet; their
particular interest was in enhancing parsing performance. Old (2003) analyzedRoget’s
Thesaurus and arrived at the conclusion that it was not a good source of standalone
preposition semantics. Beavers (2003) analyzed the aspectual and path properties of
goal-marking postpositions in Japanese, and proposed an analysis based on predicate
andeventrestrictions.Boonthum,Toida,andLevinstein(2005,2006)deﬁnedageneral-
purposesenseinventoryofsevenprepositions(butpurportedlyapplicabletoallprepo-
sitions), taking the LCSlexicon as a starting point and expanding the sense inventory
by consulting Quirk et al. (1985) and Barker (1996). Finally, as part of a more general
attempttocapturelexicalsemanticsintheformalismofMultilayeredExtendedSeman-
ticNetworks(MultiNet),Helbig(2006)developedasemantictreatmentofprepositions,
focusingprimarilyonGerman.
There has historically been a strong interest in preposition semantics in the ﬁeld of
cognitivelinguistics(Talmy1988),intheformof“schemas.”Schemasareanattemptto
visualizetherelationbetweentheobjectofthepreposition(theTrajector,orTR)andits
cognitivecontext(theLandmark,orLM).Theyprovidealanguage-independentrepre-
sentation,andhavebeenusedtoanalyzecrosslinguisticcorrespondencesinpreposition
semantics.Forexample,TylerandEvans(2003)usedschemastocapturethesemanticsof
Englishprepositions,arguingthatallmeaningsaregroundedinhumanspatio-physical
experience. Schemas have also been used as the basis of crosslinguistic analysis of
preposition semantics, for example, by Brala (2000) to describe the senses ofonandin
inEnglishandCroatian,Kna´s(2006)tomotivateasenseinventoryforatinEnglishand
Polish,andCosmeandGilquin(2008)tocontrastwithandavecinEnglishandFrench.
Trujillo (1995) also developed a language-independent classiﬁcation of spatial
prepositionsformachinetranslationpurposes,inalexicalistframework.
3.3 Automatic
Classiﬁcation ofPreposition Sense
Only a modest amount of research has been carried out on the sense disambiguation
of prepositions, largely because until recently, there haven’t been lexical semantic re-
sources and sense-tagged corpora for prepositions that could be used for this purpose.
Classiﬁcation of preposition sense has been motivated as a standalone task in appli-
cations such as machine translation, and also as a means of improving the general
performanceofsemantictaskssuchassemanticrolelabeling.
O’Hara and Wiebe (2003) were the ﬁrst to perform a standalone preposition word
sense disambiguation (WSD) task, based on the semantic roles in the Penn Treebank.
Theycollapsedthesemanticrolesintosevenbasicsemanticclasses,andbuiltadecision
treeclassiﬁerbasedonasetofcontextualfeaturessimilartothoseusedinWSDsystems.
O’HaraandWiebe(2009)isanupdatedversionofthisoriginalresearch,usingabroader
range of resources. Ye and Baldwin (2006) also built on the earlier research, in attempt-
ingtoenhancetheaccuracyofsemanticrolelabelingwithdedicatedPPdisambiguation.
131
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Theydemonstratedthepotentialforaccurateprepositionlabelingtocontributetolarge-
scaleimprovementsinoverallsemanticrolelabelingperformance.
As mentioned in Section 3.2, Litkowski and Hargraves (2007) ran a task on the
WSD of prepositions at SemEval 2007, as a spinoff of the Preposition Project. The task
focused on 34 prepositions, with a combined total of 332 senses. Similarly to a lexical
sample WSD task, participants were required to disambiguate token instances of each
preposition relative to the provided discrete sense inventory. Three teams participated
inthetask(Popescu,Tonelli,andPianta2007;YeandBaldwin2007;Yuret2007),withall
systemsoutperformingtwobaselinesoverbothﬁne-andcoarse-grainedsenseinvento-
ries,throughvariouscombinationsoflexical,syntactic,andsemanticfeatures.Thebest-
performing system achieved F-scores of 0.818 and 0.861 over ﬁneand coarse-grained
senses,respectively(YeandBaldwin2007).
In other papers dedicated to prepositional WSD, Boonthum, Toida, and Levinstein
(2005, 2006) proposed a semantic collocation-based approach to preposition interpre-
tation, and demonstrated the import of the method in a paraphrase recognition task.
Alam (2003, 2004) used decision trees to disambiguate 12 senses ofover, distinguishing
between senses which are determined by their governor and those which are deter-
minedbytheirNPcomplement.
Baldwin (2006) explored the interaction between preposition valence and the dis-
tributional hypothesis, based on latent semantic analysis (LSA; Deerwester et al. 1990).
He derived gold-standard preposition-to-preposition similarities using each of Dorr’s
LCSlexicon (based on the method of Resnik and Diab [2000]) and Roget’sThesaurus,
and compared them to the similarities predicted by LSA, in each case using either
valencespeciﬁcation(consideringintransitiveandtransitiveprepositionsseparately)or
valenceunderspeciﬁcation(consideringbothprepositionvalencestogether).Hisresults
indicated higher correlation when valence speciﬁcation is used, suggesting not only
that there is a signiﬁcant difference in semantics between transitive and intransitive
usagesofagivenpreposition,butthatitissufﬁcientlymarkedinthecontextofusethat
distributionalmethodsareabletopickuponit.
Cook and Stevenson (2006) developed a four-way classiﬁcation of the semantics
ofupin VPCs based on cognitive grammar, and classiﬁed token instances based on a
combinationoflinguisticandwordco-occurrencefeatures.
In a machine translation context, Trujillo (1995) used selectional preferences and
uniﬁcation to perform target language disambiguation over his classiﬁcation of spatial
prepositions.
Srihari, Niu, and Li (2000) used manual rules to disambiguate prepositions in
namedentities.
3.4 The
Semantics of Prepositional MWEs
PrepositionalMWEs—focusingprimarilyontheEnglishMWEtypesofVPCs,PVs,PP–
Ds,andcompoundnominals—populatethespectrumfromfullycompositionaltofully
non-compositional (Dixon 1982; McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll 2003). For instance,put
up(asinputthepictureup)isfullycompositional,whereasmakeout(asinKimandSandy
madeout) is fully non-compositional. Compositionality can be viewed relative to each
componentword(Bannard2005)orholisticallyfortheMWEasasingleunit(McCarthy,
Keller, and Carroll 2003). Withplayout(as inseehowthematchplaysout), for example,
wemightclaimthatplayisnon-compositionalbutoutis(semi-)compositional,andthat
asawholetheVPCisnon-compositional.Thequestionofcompositionalityisconfused
132
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
somewhat by productive constructions such as the resultativeup(e.g.,eat/beat/ﬁnish/...
up)andthemannerby(e.g.,bytrain/car/broomstick/...),whichhavespecializedsemantics
relative to their simplex usages but occur relatively freely with this semantics within a
givenconstruction(VPCandPP–D,respectively,inourexamples).
TherehavebeenanumberofattemptstomodelthecompositionalityofVPCs.Ban-
nard (2005, 2006) considered VPC compositionality at the component word level, and
proposedadistributionalapproachthatassumesthereisapositivecorrelationbetween
compositionalityandthedistributionalsimilarityofeachcomponenttosimplexusages
of that same word. McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll (2003) opted for a holistic notion
of compositionality and used a range of approaches based on the distributional “the-
saurus”ofLin(1998)tomodelcompositionality,forexample,incalculatingtheoverlap
in the top-N similar words for a given VPC and its head verb. They also examined
the use of statistical tests such as mutual information in modeling compositionality,
and found the similarity-based methods to correlate more highly with the human
judgments. Baldwin et al. (2003) used LSA to analyze the compositionality of VPCs
(andcompoundnouns),andonceagaindemonstratedthatthereisapositivecorrelation
between compositionality and the distributional similarity between a given VPC and
its head word. Kim and Baldwin (2007) predicted the compositionality of VPCs based
on a combination of the McCarthy, Keller, and Carroll (2003) and Bannard (2006) data
sets,andanalysisofverb–particleco-occurrencepatterns.Takingadifferentapproachto
the task, Patrick and Fletcher (2005) classiﬁedtokeninstances of verb–preposition pairs
accordingtothethreeclassesofdecomposable(syntacticdependencebetweenthePand
V, with compositional semantics), non-decomposable (syntactic dependence between
the P and V, with idiomatic semantics), and independent (no syntactic dependence
betweenthePandV).
Levi(1978)pioneeredtheuseofprepositionsasameansofinterpretingcompound
nouns, through the notion of compatibility with paraphrases incorporating preposi-
tions. For example,babychaircan be paraphrased aschairfor(a)baby, indicating com-
patibility with the FOR class. In her original research, Levi used four prepositions, in
combination with a set of verbs (for relative clause paraphrases) and semantic roles
(fornominalizations).Lauer(1995)extendedthisresearchindevelopinganexclusively
preposition-basedsetofsevensemanticclasses.Forexample,Leviwouldinterprettruck
driveras PATIENT, in the sense that truck is the patient of the underlying verb of the
head nountodrive, whereas Lauer would interpret it as OF (c.f.,driverof(the)truck).
Girju (2007, 2009) leveraged translation data to improve the accuracy of compound
noun interpretation, based on the observation that the choice of preposition in Ro-
mance languages is often indicative of the semantics of the compound noun. Con-
versely, Johnston and Busa (1996) used Qualia structure from the Generative Lexicon
(Pustejovsky 1995) to interpret the prepositions in Italian complex nominals, such as
macchinadacorsa”race car”. Jensen and Nilsson (2003) used (Danish) prepositions as
the basis of a ﬁnite set of role relations with which to describe the meaning content
of nominals, and demonstrated the utility of the resultant ontology in disambiguating
nominalphrases.
4. Applications
Prepositions have tended to be overlooked in NLP applications, but there have been
isolated examples ofprepositions being shown tobeworthy of dedicated treatment. In
particular,applicationsrequiringsomelevelofsyntacticabstractiontendtobeneﬁtfrom
133
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
the inclusion of prepositions. Similarly, applications which incorporate an element of
naturallanguagegenerationorrealizationneedtopreserveprepositionsintheinterests
ofproducingwell-formedoutputs.
Riloff (1995) challenged the validity of the stop-word philosophy for text classi-
ﬁcation, and demonstrated that dependency tuples incorporating prepositions are a
more effective document representation than simple words. In a direct challenge to
the prevalent “stop word” perception of prepositions in information retrieval, Hansen
(2005) and Lassen (2006) placed emphasis on not only prepositions but preposi-
tion semantics in a music retrieval system and ontology-based text search system,
respectively.
Information extraction is one application where prepositions are uncontrover-
sially crucial to system accuracy, in terms of the role they play in named entities
(CucchiarelliandVelardi2001;Toral2005;Kozareva2006)andinIEpatterns,inlinking
theelementsinatext(Appeltetal.1993;Muslea1999;Onoetal.2001;LeroyandChen
2002).
Benamara (2005) used preposition semantics in a cooperative question answering
system. In the context of cross-language question answering (CLQA), Hartrumpf,
Helbig, and Osswald (2006) used MultiNet to interpret the semantics of German
prepositions, and demonstrated that in instances where the answer passage contained
a different preposition to that included in the original question, preposition semantics
boostedtheperformanceoftheirCLQAsystem.
Boonthum,Toida,andLevinstein(2006)successfullyappliedtheirprepositionWSD
methodinaparaphraserecognitiontask,namely,predictingthatKimcoveredthebabyin
blanketsandKimcoveredthebabywithblanketshaveessentiallythesamesemantics.They
proposed seven general senses of prepositions (e.g., PARTICIPANT,INSTRUMENT,and
QUALITY),andannotatedprepositionsoccurringin120sentencesforeachof10prepo-
sitions.TheyevaluatedaWSDmethodoverthisdata,andsketchedhowthepreposition
senseinformationcouldthenbeusedforparaphraserecognition.
Prepositions have deservedly received a moderate amount of attention in appli-
cations which require explicit representation of 3D space, such as robotics, animated
agents, and virtual reality, in the context of interpreting the spatial information of
prepositions. For example, Xu and Badler (2000) developed a geometric deﬁnition of
the motion trajectories of prepositions, whereas Tokunaga, Koyama, and Saito (2005)
use potential functions to estimate the spatial extent of Japanese spatial nouns (which
combine with postpositions to have a similar syntactic and semantic proﬁle to Eng-
lish spatial prepositions). Kelleher and van Genabith (2003) proposed a method for
interpretinginfrontof andbehindin a virtual reality environment based on different
frames of reference. Hying (2007) carried out an analysis of preposition semantics
in the HRCR Map Task corpus, and used it to evaluate two models of projective
prepositions. Kelleher and Kruijff (2005) developed a model for grounding spatial
expressions in visual perception and also for modeling proximity, and Reichelt and
Verleih(2005)developedtheB3Dsystemforgeneratingacomputationalrepresentation
of prepositions in geospatial applications. Furlan, Baldwin, and Klippel (2007) used
preposition occurrence in Web data as a means of classifying landmarks for use in
route directions. Finally, Kelleher and Costello (2009) proposed computational models
oftopologicalandprojectivespatialprepositionsforuseinavisuallysituateddialogue
system.
In the ﬁeld of machine translation (MT), spatial and temporal prepositions have
received a moderate amount of attention, particularly in the context of interlingua-
and transfer-based MT. Dorr and Voss (1993) mapped prepositions onto 5-place spatial
134
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
predicatesinthecontextofinterlingua-basedMT,buildingontheworkofTalmy(1985)
and Jackendoff (1983, 1990). N¨ubel (1996) developed a set of interlingual predicates for
adjunct PPs in English↔German MT, incorporating a dialogue component which can
be used to disambiguate prepositions relative to the discourse context. Bond, Ogura,
and Uchino (1997) developed a dedicated type hierarchy for the generation of preposi-
tions associated with temporal expressions in Japanese→English machine translation.
KumarNaskarandBandyopadhyay(2006)proposedatransfer-basedmethodfortrans-
lating English prepositions into Bengali postpositions/inﬂectional markers, focusing
on spatial, temporal, and also idiomatic usages. Bond (1998) proposed an algorithm
for translating Japanese spatial nouns into English prepositions based on semantic
ﬁelds. Trujillo (1995) used his classiﬁcation of spatial prepositions as the basis of an
English↔Spanish translation system using bilingual lexical rules. Hajiˇc et al. (2002)
proposed a method for inserting prepositions into tectogrammatical representations in
Czech→English MT, although they did not manage to integrate the predictions into
their ﬁnal MT system. Husain, Sharma, and Reddy (2007) achieved promising results
usinganexplicitmodelofprepositionsemanticsasthebasisforprepositionselectionin
Hindi/Telugu→Englishmachinetranslation.
Inthecontextofstatisticalmachinetranslation,ToutanovaandSuzuki(2007)iden-
tiﬁedthatcasemarker(=postposition)generationposesasigniﬁcantchallengeforstan-
dard phrase-based methods in English→Japanese translation, identifying case marker
errors in 16% of outputs. They proposed ann-best reranking method to improve case
marker generation performance, whereby they expand then-best list to include extra
casemarkervariations,andperformcasemarkerpredictionforeachbunsetsu.
7
Ineval-
uation, they demonstrated that their proposed method signiﬁcantly outperforms both
the baseline SMT system (Quirk, Menezes, and Cherry 2005) and a comparablen-best
rerankingmethodwithoutdedicatedcasemarkercandidateexpansion.Thesigniﬁcance
of this research is that it demonstrates that dedicated handling of postpositions can
enhance SMT performance, a result which has promise for adpositions and markers in
otherlanguages.
AsstatedinSection1,prepositionsarenotoriouslyhardfornon-nativespeakersto
master,andareafrequentsourceoferrorsinEnglishasaSecondLanguage(ESL)prose.
Errors can take the form of incorrect preposition selection (e.g.,*Kimstayedinhome),
erroneous preposition insertion (e.g.,*Kimplayedatoutside), or erroneous preposition
omission (e.g., *Kimwent φ theconference) (Tetreault and Chodorow 2008b). Tetreault
and Chodorow (2008b) proposed a combined detection/correction method based on a
supervisedmodel.Foreachprepositioninatext,theypredictthemostlikelycandidate
from 34 candidates, based on local word context. If the most likely candidate differs
from the original preposition selection, an error is predicted and correction proposed.
In evaluation over ESL texts, they found that their method performs at high precision
but low recall. Separately, they found that the same method performs considerably
better when applied to preposition selection over native English text, and also that it
isimportanttohavemultipleannotatorscorrectESLtextinordertoavoidskewingthe
data(TetreaultandChodorow2008a).Inotherresearch,Gamonetal.(2008)performed
preposition selection in terms of both selection and insertion, but over a smaller
set of prepositions. De Felice and Pulman (2007) similarly proposed a method for
7 Roughlyspeaking,abunsetsuisacase-markedchunk.
135
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
prepositioncorrection,butonlyevaluatedtheirmodeloverﬁveprepositionsandnative
Englishtext.
5. Introduction totheArticlesinThis Special Issue
Forthisspecialissueweinvitedsubmissionsthatbroughtatheoreticalbasistoresearch
on prepositions in lexical resources and NLP tasks. The number of submissions re-
ceived reﬂects the interest in prepositions at this time, with a total of 16 submissions.
On the basis of a rigorous review process, we selected four articles for inclusion in
the special issue, covering: the use of semantic resources to disambiguate preposition
semantics, for use in lexical acquisition (O’Hara and Wiebe 2009); a crosslingual lexical
semanticanalysisofprepositionstointerpretnominalcompounds(Girju2009);aformal
semantic analysis of preposition semantics, and its possible application in Norwegian–
Englishmachinetranslation(JørgensenandLønning2009);andacomputationalmodel
forprepositionsemanticsforuseinadialoguesystem(KelleherandCostello2009).We
nowoutlineeachofthesearticles.
Theﬁrsttwoarticleslookatthesemanticinterpretationofprepositions,astheytend
tobehighlypolysemousandhaveanumberofcloselyrelatedsenses.
O’Hara and Wiebe look at the disambiguation of preposition semantics for use
in lexical acquisition, in semi-automatically extending lexical resources. They investi-
gate the utility of information learned from resources such as the Penn Treebank and
FrameNet,toperformsemanticroledisambiguationofPPs.Theproposedmethodology
is evaluated in a series of experiments, and different sense granularities are contrasted
intask-basedevaluation.
Prepositions are highly frequent in many languages, but also highly idiomatic in
usageinagivenlanguage(hencethedifﬁcultyofnon-nativespeakersinlearningtouse
prepositions correctly). However, there are instances of cross-linguistic regularities in
theirlinguisticrealizations.Forexample,whentranslatingEnglishnominalcompounds
of the type Noun Preposition Noun (N P N) and Noun Noun (N N) into Romance
languages,theseareoftentranslatedintoNPNcompounds,wherethechoiceofprepo-
sition is (semi-)predictable from the semantics of the compound. Girju investigates
theroleofthesyntacticandsemanticpropertiesofprepositionsinEnglishandRomance
languages in the automatic semantic interpretation of English nominal compounds.
On the basis of an extensive corpus analysis of the distribution of semantic relations
in nominal compounds in English and ﬁve Romance languages, she attempts to dis-
ambiguate the semantic relations in English nominal compounds. She focuses on non-
equative compositional nominal compounds, and empirically tests the contribution of
prepositions to the task of semantic interpretation, using a supervised, knowledge-
intensivemodel.
Identiﬁcationofcrosslinguisticandpossiblyuniversalpropertiesofprepositions(or
equivalentconstructions)couldpotentiallyimpactonanumberofNLPapplications.In
machine translation, for example, a formal description of the crosslinguistic semantic
propertiesofprepositionscouldprovidethebasisforaninterlingua.Thisisthetopicof
thethirdarticleinthisspecialissue:JørgensenandLønningproposeauniﬁcation-based
grammar implementation of a formal semantic analysis of preposition semantics, and
demonstrateitsapplicationinNorwegian→EnglishMT.
A correct handling of prepositions, particularly spatial prepositions, is also impor-
tantindialoguesystems,asprepositionsareoftenusedtorefertoentitiesinthephysical
environment of system interaction. The last article in this special issue addresses this
136
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
topic: Kelleher and Costello present computational models of spatial preposition
semantics for use in visually situated dialogue systems. The proposed models of
topological and projective spatial prepositions can be used for both interpretation and
generation of prepositional expressions in complex visual environments containing
multipleobjects,andareabletoaccountforthecontextualeffectwhichotherdistractor
objects can have on the region described by a preposition. The evaluation is done in
terms of psycholinguistic tests evaluating the approach to distractor interference on
prepositional semantics. The models are employed in a human–robot dialogue system
to interpret locative expressions containing a topological preposition and to generate
spatialreferencesinvisuallysituatedcontexts.
6. Discussion and Conclusion
As we hope to have demonstrated in this introduction, prepositions have led a mixed
existence in computational linguistics and related ﬁelds, particularly in the context
of applications. In applications requiring spatial interpretation (e.g., situated dialogue
systems), they have been the focus of dedicated research, and in applications which
incorporate a language generation component such as MT, there have been isolated
instances exemplifying the need for dedicated handling of prepositions/case markers.
In general, however, they tend to have been relegated to the sidelines in applied NLP
research.
Research on prepositions has tended to concentrate on a speciﬁc subset of preposi-
tionsinaparticularlanguage,oftenasaone-offresearchtaskwhichhasfailedtomake
broader impact in the ﬁeld of computational linguistics. PP attachment—especially in
English—has been an exception, in the sense that the RRR data set has given rise to an
activestrandofresearchcenteredaroundprepositions.WehopethatvariantsoftheRRR
datasetfromAttererandSch¨utze(2007)andAgirre,Baldwin,andMartinez(2008)will
reinvigorateinterestinPPattachment,inasituatedparsingcontext.Similarly,theemer-
gence of resources such as the Preposition Project, and the data set made available for
the SemEval 2007 task on the word sense disambiguation of prepositions (Litkowski
and Hargraves 2007), provide the means for more detailed analysis of preposition
semantics. In addition to standalone word sense disambiguation tasks, however, there
needs to be more research on the interaction of preposition semantics with other
semantic tasks, such as semantic role labeling and the word sense disambiguation of
contentwords.Theincreasingavailabilityoflarge-scaleparallelcorporapavestheway
for crosslinguistic research on preposition syntax. Areas of particular promise in this
regardaremethodsforgeneratingprepositionsinMT,andautomaticerrorcorrectionof
prepositionusageinnon-nativespeakertext.FollowingtheleadofSaint-Dizier(2006b),
Jørgensen and Lønning (2009), and others, we also hope to see more crosslinguistic
and typological research on the lexical semantics of prepositions. Although there has
been a steady proliferation of WordNets for different languages, linked variously to
English WordNet (e.g., EuroWordNet for several European languages [Vossen 1998],
BALKANETforBalkanlanguages[Stamouetal.2002],HowNetforChinese[Dongand
Dong2006],andJapaneseWordNetforJapanese[Isaharaetal.2008]),theyhavetended
to follow the lead of English WordNet and focus exclusively on content words. Given
the increasing maturity of resources such as the Preposition Project and PrepNet, the
time seems right to develop preposition sense inventories for more languages, linked
back to English. On the basis of currently available resources and future efforts such
as these, we believe there will be a steady lowering of the barrier to including a more
systematichandlingofprepositionsinNLPapplications.
137
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
The purpose of this article has been to highlight the theoretical and applied re-
search that has been done on prepositions in computational linguistics, focusing on
computationalsyntaxandsemantics.Inparticular,wehaveaimedtohighlightapplied
researchwhichhasfocusedspeciﬁcallyonprepositions.Itisourhopethatthroughthis
special issue, we will rekindle interest in prepositions and motivate greater awareness
ofprepositionsinvariousapplications.
Acknowledgments
ThankstoKenLitkowski,PaolaMerlo,
PatrickSaint-Dizier,andMartinVolkfor
feedbackonanearlierdraftofthispaper,
andRobertDaleandMaryGardinerfortheir
unfailingsupportandencouragement
throughouttheeditorialprocess.Wealso
acknowledgetheeffortsoftheconsiderable
numberofreviewerswhodevotedtimeto
reviewingtheoriginalsubmissionstothe
specialissue,andﬁne-tuningtheaccepted
articles.Theﬁrstauthorofthisarticlewas
supportedinpartbytheAustralianResearch
CouncilthroughDiscoveryProjectgrant
DP0663879.
References
Aasa,J¨orgen.2004.Unsupervisedresolution
ofPPattachmentambiguitiesinSwedish.
Master’sthesis,StockholmUniversity.
Abeill´e,Anne,OlivierBonami,Dani`ele
Godard,andJesseTseng.2003.The
syntaxof`aandde:anHPSGanalysis.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages133–144,
Toulouse.
Abney,Steven,RobertE.Schapire,and
YoramSinger.1999.Boostingappliedto
taggingandPPattachment.InProceedings
oftheJointSIGDATConferenceonEmpirical
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessingand
VeryLargeCorpora(EMNLP/VLC-99),
pages38–45,CollegePark,MD.
Agirre,Eneko,TimothyBaldwin,and
DavidMartinez.2008.Improvingparsing
andPPattachmentperformancewith
senseinformation.InProceedingsofthe
46thAnnualMeetingoftheACL:Human
LanguageTechnologies,pages317–325,
Columbus,OH.
Alam,YukikoSasaki.2003.For
computationaltreatmentofthepolysemy
ofprepositionalusesofOver.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages66–76,
Toulouse.
Alam,YukikoSasaki.2004.Decisiontrees
forsensedisambiguationofprepositions:
Caseofover.InProceedingsofthe
HLT-NAACL2004Workshopon
ComputationalLexicalSemantics,
pages52–59,Boston,MA.
Alegre,MarthaA.,JosepM.Sopena,and
AgustiLloberas.1999.PP-attachment:A
committeemachineapproach.In
ProceedingsoftheJointSIGDATConference
onEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
ProcessingandVeryLargeCorpora
(EMNLP/VLC-99),pages231–238,
CollegePark,MD.
Allen,JamesF.1984.Towardsageneral
theoryofactionandtime.Artiﬁcial
Intelligence,23:123–154.
Altmann,GerryandMarkSteedman.1988.
Interactionwithcontextduringhuman
sentenceprocessing.Cognition,
30(3):191–238.
Appelt,DouglasE.,JerryR.Hobbs,John
Bear,DavidIsrael,MegumiKameyama,
andMabryTyson.1993.FASTUS:A
ﬁnite-stateprocessorforinformation
extractionfromreal-worldtext.In
Proceedingsofthe13thInternationalJoint
ConferenceonArtiﬁcialIntelligence
(IJCAI-93),pages1172–1181,Chambery.
Arsenijevi´c,Boban.2005.Subeventsand
prepositions.InProceedingsoftheSecond
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguistic
DimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUsein
ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsand
Applications,pages39–46,Colchester.
Atterer,MichaelaandHinrichSch¨utze.2007.
Prepositionalphraseattachmentwithout
oracles.ComputationalLinguistics,
33(4):469–476.
Baeza-Yates,RicardoandBerthier
Ribeiro-Neto.1999.ModernInformation
Retrieval.AddisonWesley/ACMpress,
Harlow,UK.
Baker,CollinF.,CharlesJ.Fillmore,and
JohnB.Lowe.1998.TheBerkeley
FrameNetproject.InProceedingsofthe
36thAnnualMeetingoftheACLand17th
InternationalConferenceonComputational
138
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
Linguistics:COLING/ACL-98,pages86–90,
Montreal.
Baldwin,Timothy.2005a.Deeplexical
acquisitionofverb-particleconstructions.
ComputerSpeechandLanguage,
19(4):398–414.
Baldwin,Timothy.2005b.Lookingfor
prepositionalverbsincorpusdata.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages180–189,Colchester.
Baldwin,Timothy.2006.Distributional
similarityandprepositionsemantics.In
Saint-Dizier(Saint-Dizier2006a).
Baldwin,Timothy.2008.Aresourcefor
evaluatingthedeeplexicalacquisitionof
Englishverb-particleconstructions.In
ProceedingsoftheLREC2008Workshop:
TowardsaSharedTaskforMultiword
Expressions(MWE2008),pages1–2,
Marrakech.
Baldwin,Timothy,ColinBannard,Takaaki
Tanaka,andDominicWiddows.2003.
Anempiricalmodelofmultiword
expressiondecomposability.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-2003Workshop
onMultiwordExpressions:Analysis,
AcquisitionandTreatment,pages89–96,
Sapporo.
Baldwin,Timothy,JohnBeavers,Leonoor
vanderBeek,FrancisBond,Dan
Flickinger,andIvanA.Sag.2006.Insearch
ofasystematictreatmentofdeterminerless
PPs.InSaint-Dizier(Saint-Dizier2006a).
Baldwin,Timothy,EmilyM.Bender,Dan
Flickinger,AraKim,andStephanOepen.
2004.Road-testingtheEnglishResource
GrammarovertheBritishNational
Corpus.InProceedingsofthe4th
InternationalConferenceonLanguage
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2004),
pages2047–2050,Lisbon.
Baldwin,TimothyandAlineVillavicencio.
2002.Extractingtheunextractable:Acase
studyonverb-particles.InProceedingsof
the6thConferenceonNaturalLanguage
Learning(CoNLL-2002),pages98–104,
Taipei.
Bannard,Colin.2005.Learningaboutthe
meaningofverb-particleconstructions
fromcorpora.ComputerSpeechand
Language,19(4):467–478.
Bannard,Colin.2006.AcquiringPhrasal
LexiconsfromCorpora.Ph.D.thesis,
UniversityofEdinburgh.
Barker,Ken.1996.Theassessmentof
semanticcasesusingEnglishpositional,
prepositionalandadverbialcasemarkers.
TechnicalReportTR-96-08,Computer
Science,UniversityofOttawa.
Beavers,John.2003.Thesemanticsand
polysemyofgoalmarkingprepositionsin
Japanese.InProceedingsofthe
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguistic
DimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUsein
ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsand
Applications,pages205–216,Toulouse.
Benamara,Farah.2005.Reasoningwith
prepositionswithinacooperative
question-answeringframework.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages145–152,Colchester.
Bennett,DavidC.1975.SpatialandTemporal
usesofEnglishPrepositions:AsEssayin
StratiﬁedSemantics.Longman,London.
Bikel,DanielM.2004.IntricaciesofCollins’
parsingmodel.ComputationalLinguistics,
30(4):479–511.
Bond,Francis.1998.Interpretationof
Japanese“spatial”nounsin
Japanese-to-Englishmachinetranslation.
Presentationatthe1998AnnualGeneral
MeetingoftheAustralianLinguistics
Society:ALS-98.
Bond,Francis,KentaroOgura,andHajime
Uchino.1997.Temporalexpressionsin
Japanese-to-Englishmachinetranslation.
InProceedingsofthe7thInternational
ConferenceonTheoreticalandMethodological
IssuesinMachineTranslation(TMI-97),
pages55–62,SantaFe,NM.
Boonthum,Chutima,ShunichiToida,and
IrwinLevinstein.2005.Sense
disambiguationforpreposition‘with’.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages153–162,Colchester.
Boonthum,Chutima,ShunichiToida,and
IrwinLevinstein.2006.Prepositionsenses:
Generalizeddisambiguationmodel.In
Proceedingsofthe7thInternational
ConferenceonIntelligentTextProcessingand
ComputationalLinguistics(CICLing-2006),
pages196–207,MexicoCity.
Brala,MarijaM.2000.Understandingand
translating(spatial)prepositions:An
exerciseincognitivesemanticsfor
lexicographicpurposes.WorkingPapersof
theUniversityofCambridgeResearchCentre
forEnglishandAppliedLinguistics,7.
UniversityofCambridge.
139
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Br´ee,D.S.andR.A.Smit.1986.Temporal
relations.JournalofSemantics,5(4):345–384.
Briscoe,TedandJohnCarroll.1997.
Automaticextractionofsubcategorization
fromcorpora.InProceedingsofthe5th
ConferenceonAppliedNaturalLanguage
Processing(ANLP),pages356–363,
Washington,DC.
Briscoe,Ted,JohnCarroll,andRebecca
Watson.2006.Thesecondreleaseofthe
RASPsystem.InProceedingsofthePoster
Sessionofthe21stInternationalConferenceon
ComputationalLinguisticsand44thAnnual
MeetingoftheAssociationforComputational
Linguistics(COLING/ACL2006),
pages77–80,Sydney.
Burnard,Lou.2000.ReferenceGuideforthe
BritishNationalCorpus.OxfordUniversity
ComputingServices,Oxford,UK.
Calvo,Hiram,AlexanderGelbukh,and
AdamKilgarriff.2005.Distributional
thesaurusversusWordNet:Acomparison
ofbackofftechniquesforunsupervisedPP
attachment.InProceedingsofthe6th
InternationalConferenceonIntelligentText
ProcessingandComputationalLinguistics
(CICLing-2005),pages177–188,
MexicoCity.
Calzolari,Nicoletta,CharlesFillmore,
RalphGrishman,NancyIde,Alessandro
Lenci,CatherineMacLeod,and
AntonioZampolli.2002.Towards
bestpracticeformultiwordexpressions
incomputationallexicons.In
Proceedingsofthe3rdInternational
ConferenceonLanguageResourcesand
Evaluation(LREC2002),pages1934–1940,
LasPalmas.
Cannesson,EmmanuelleandPatrick
Saint-Dizier.2002.Deﬁningand
representingprepositionsenses:A
preliminaryanalysis.InProceedings
oftheACL-02WorkshoponWordSense
Disambiguation:RecentSuccesses
andFutureDirections,pages25–31,
Philadelphia,PA.
Ch´eliz,Mar´ıadelCarmenHorno.2002.Lo
quelaPreposici´onEsconde:EstudioSobrela
ArgumentalidadPreposicionalenelPredicado
Verbal.UniversityofZaragozaPress,
Zaragoza,Spain.(InSpanish).
Chodorow,Martin,JoelTetreault,and
Na-RaeHan.2007.Detectionof
grammaticalerrorsinvolvingprepositions.
InProceedingsofthe4thACL-SIGSEM
WorkshoponPrepositions,pages25–30,
Prague.
Church,KennethandRameshPatil.1982.
Copingwithsyntacticambiguityorhow
toputtheblockintheboxonthetable.
AmericanJournalofComputational
Linguistics,8(3–4):139–149.
Collins,MichaelandJamesBrooks.1995.
Prepositionalphraseattachmentthrougha
backed-offmodel.InProceedingsofthe3rd
AnnualWorkshoponVeryLargeCorpora,
pages27–38,Cambridge,MA.
Cook,PaulandSuzanneStevenson.2006.
ClassifyingparticlesemanticsinEnglish
verb-particleconstructions.InProceedings
oftheCOLING/ACL2006Workshopon
MultiwordExpressions:Identifyingand
ExploitingUnderlyingProperties,
pages45–53,Sydney.
Copestake,Ann,DanFlickinger,IvanA.Sag,
andCarlPollard.2005.Minimalrecursion
semantics:Anintroduction.Journalof
ResearchonLanguageandComputation,
3(2–3):281–332.
Copestake,Ann,FabreLambeau,Aline
Villavicencio,FrancisBond,Timothy
Baldwin,IvanSag,andDanFlickinger.
2002.Multiwordexpressions:Linguistic
precisionandreusability.InProceedingsof
the3rdInternationalConferenceonLanguage
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2002),
pages1941–1947,LasPalmas.
Cosme,ChristelleandGa¨etanelleGilquin.
2008.Freeandboundprepositions
inacontrastiveperspective:The
caseofwithandavec.InSylviane
GrangerandFannyMeunier,editors,
Phraseology:AnInterdisciplinary
Perspective.JohnBenjamins,Amsterdam,
pages259–274.
Cucchiarelli,AlessandroandPaolaVelardi.
2001.Unsupervisednamedentity
recognitionusingsyntacticandsemantic
contextualevidence.Computational
Linguistics,27(1):123–131.
Dahlgren,KathleenandJoyceMcDowell.
1986.Usingcommonsenseknowledge
todisambiguateprepositional
phrasemodiﬁers.InProceedingsof
the6thConferenceonArtiﬁcial
Intelligence(AAAI-86),pages589–593,
Philadelphia,PA.
DeFelice,RacheleandStephenG.Pulman.
2007.Automaticallyacquiringmodelsof
prepositionuse.InProceedingsofthe4th
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages45–50,Prague.
Deerwester,Scott,SusanT.Dumais,
GeorgeW.Furnas,ThomasK.Landauer,
andRichardHarshman.1990.Indexingby
latentsemanticanalysis.Journalofthe
AmericanSocietyofInformationScience,
41(6):391–407.
140
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
Deh´e,Nicole,RayJackendoff,Andrew
McIntyre,andSilkeUrban,editors.2002.
Verb-particleexplorations.Moutonde
Gruyter,Berlin/NewYork.
Denis,Pascal,JonasKuhn,andStephen
Wechsler.2003.V-PPgoalmotion
complexesinEnglish:AnHPSGaccount.
InProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages121–132,
Toulouse.
Dixon,RobertM.W.1982.Thegrammarof
Englishphrasalverbs.AustralianJournalof
Linguistics,2:149–247.
D¨omges,Florian,TiborKiss,AntjeM¨uller,
andClaudiaRoch.2007.Measuringthe
productivityofdeterminerlessPPs.In
Proceedingsofthe4thACL-SIGSEM
WorkshoponPrepositions,pages31–37,
Prague.
Dong,ZhendongandQiangDong.2006.
HowNetAndtheComputationofMeaning.
WorldScientiﬁcPublishing,River
Edge,NJ.
Dorr,Bonnie.1993.MachineTranslation:A
ViewfromtheLexicon.MITPress,
Cambridge,MA.
Dorr,BonnieandNizarHabash.2002.
Interlinguaapproximation:A
generation-heavyapproach.InProceedings
oftheAMTA-2002InterlinguaReliability
Workshop,Tiburon,CA.
Dorr,BonnieJ.1997.Large-scaledictionary
constructionforforeignlanguagetutoring
andinterlingualmachinetranslation.
MachineTranslation,12(4):271–322.
Dorr,BonnieJ.andClareR.Voss.1993.
Machinetranslationofspatialexpressions:
Deﬁningtherelationbetweenan
interlinguaandaknowledge
representationsystem.InProceedingsofthe
11thAnnualConferenceonArtiﬁcial
Intelligence(AAAI-93),pages374–379,
Washington,DC.
Durrell,MartinandDavidBr´ee.1993.
Germantemporalprepositionsfroman
Englishperspective.InZelinski-Wibbelt
(Zelinski-Wibbelt1993),pages295–326.
Evert,StefanandBrigitteKrenn.2005.Using
smallrandomsamplesforthemanual
evaluationofstatisticalassociation
measures.ComputerSpeechandLanguage,
19(4):450–466.
Fazly,Afsaneh,PaulCook,andSuzanne
Stevenson.2009.Unsupervisedtypeand
tokenidentiﬁcationofidiomatic
expressions.ComputationalLinguistics,
35(1):61–103.
Fellbaum,Christiane,editor.1998.WordNet:
AnElectronicLexicalDatabase.MITPress,
Cambridge,MA.
Fillmore,CharlesJ.1968.Thecaseforcase.In
EmmonBachandRobertT.Harms,
editors,UniversalsinLinguisticTheory.
Holt,Rinehart,andWinston,NewYork,
pages1–88.
Ford,Marilyn,JoanBresnan,andRonald
Kaplan.1982.Acompetence-basedtheory
ofsyntacticclosure.InJoanBresnan,
editor,TheMentalRepresentationof
GrammaticalRelations.MITPress,
Cambridge,MA,pages727–796.
Fort,Kar¨enandBrunoGuillaume.2007.
PrepLex:AlexiconofFrenchprepositions
forparsing.InProceedingsofthe4th
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages17–24,Prague.
Foth,KilianA.andWolfgangMenzel.2006.
ThebeneﬁtofstochasticPPattachmentto
arule-basedparser.InProceedingsofthe
PosterSessionofthe21stInternational
ConferenceonComputationalLinguisticsand
44thAnnualMeetingoftheAssociationfor
ComputationalLinguistics(COLING/ACL
2006),pages223–230,Sydney.
Franz,Alexander.1996.LearningPP
attachmentfromcorpusstatistics.InStefan
Wermter,EllenRiloff,andGabriele
Scheler,editors,Connectionist,Statistical,
andSymbolicApproachestoLearningfor
NaturalLanguageProcessing.Springer,
Berlin,Germany,pages188–202.
Frazier,Lyn.1979.OnComprehending
Sentences:SyntacticParsingStrategies.
Ph.D.thesis,UniversityofConnecticut.
Furlan,Aidan,TimothyBaldwin,andAlex
Klippel.2007.Landmarkclassiﬁcationfor
routedescriptiongeneration.InProceedings
ofthe4thACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages9–16,Prague.
Gala,NuriaandMathieuLafourcade.
2005.Combiningcorpus-basedpattern
distributionswithlexicalsignatures
forPPattachmentambiguityresolution.
InProceedingsofthe6thSymposiumon
NaturalLanguageProcessing(SNLP-05),
ChiangRai.
Gamon,Michael,JianfengGao,Chris
Brockett,AlexandreKlementiev,
WilliamB.Dolan,DmitriyBelenko,and
LucyVanderwende.2008.Using
contextualspellertechniquesand
languagemodelingforESLerror
correction.InProceedingsofthe3rd
InternationalJointConferenceonNatural
LanguageProcessing(IJCNLP-08),
pages449–456,Hyderabad.
141
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Gaussier,EricandNicolaCancedda.2001.
ProbabilisticmodelsforPP-attachment
resolutionandNPanalysis.InProceedings
oftheACL/EACL-2001Workshopon
ComputationalNaturalLanguageLearning
(CoNLL-2001),pages1–8,Toulouse.
Girju,Roxana.2007.Improvingthe
interpretationofnounphraseswith
cross-linguisticinformation.InProceedings
ofthe45thAnnualMeetingoftheACL,
pages568–575,Prague.
Girju,Roxana.2009.Thesyntaxand
semanticsofprepositionsinthetaskof
automaticinterpretationofnominal
phrasesandcompounds:Across-linguistic
study.ComputationalLinguistics,
35(2):185–228.
Hahn,Udo,MartinRomacker,andStefan
Schulz.2002.Creatingknowledge
repositoriesfrombiomedicalreports:The
MEDSYNDIKATE system.InProceedingsof
thePaciﬁcSymposiumonBiocomputing2002,
pages338–349,Lihue,HI.
Hajiˇc,Jan,Martin
ˇ
Cmejrek,JasonEisner,
GeraldPenn,OwenRambow,Drago
Radev,YuanDing,TerryKoo,andKristen
Parton.2002.Naturallanguagegeneration
inthecontextofmachinetranslation.
Technicalreport,CSLP,JohnsHopkins
University.Availableatwww.clsp.jhu.
edu/ws02/groups/mt/?MT final rpt.pdf.
Hansen,SteffenLeo.2005.Concept-based
representationofprepositions.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages138–144,Colchester.
Hartrumpf,Sven.1999.Hybrid
disambiguationofprepositionalphrase
attachmentandinterpretation.In
ProceedingsoftheJointSIGDATConference
onEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
ProcessingandVeryLargeCorpora
(EMNLP/VLC-99),pages111–120,
CollegePark,MD.
Hartrumpf,Sven,HermannHelbig,and
RainerOsswald.2006.Semantic
interpretationofprepositionsforNLP
applications.InProceedingsoftheThird
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages29–36,Trento.
Helbig,Hermann.2006.Knowledge
RepresentationandtheSemanticsof
NaturalLanguage.Springer,Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Hellan,LarsandDorotheeBeermann.2005.
Classiﬁcationofprepositionalsensesfor
deepgrammarapplications.InProceedings
oftheSecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages74–83,
Colchester.
Hindle,DonaldandMatsRooth.1993.
Structuralambiguityandlexicalrelations.
ComputationalLinguistics,19(1):103–120.
Hirst,Graeme.1987.SemanticInterpretation
andtheResolutionofAmbiguity.Cambridge
UniversityPress,Cambridge,UK.
Huddleston,RodneyandGeoffreyK.
Pullum.2002.TheCambridgeGrammarof
theEnglishLanguage.Cambridge
UniversityPress,Cambridge,UK.
Husain,Samar,DiptiMisraSharma,and
ManoharReddy.2007.Simplepreposition
correspondence:AprobleminEnglishto
Indianlanguagemachinetranslation.In
Proceedingsofthe4thACL-SIGSEM
WorkshoponPrepositions,pages51–58,
Prague.
Hying,Christian.2007.Acorpus-based
analysisofgeometricconstraintson
projectiveprepositions.InProceedings
ofthe4thACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages1–8,Prague.
Isahara,Hitoshi,FrancisBond,Kiyotaka
Uchimoto,MasaoUtiyama,andKyoko
Kanzaki.2008.Developmentofthe
JapaneseWordNet.InProceedingsofthe
6thInternationalConferenceonLanguage
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2008),
Marrakech.
Izumi,Emi,KiyotakaUchimoto,Toyomi
Saiga,ThepchaiSupnithi,andHitoshi
Isahara.2003.Automaticerrordetection
intheJapaneselearners’Englishspoken
data.InProceedingsofthe41stAnnual
MeetingoftheACL,pages145–148,
Sapporo.
Jackendoff,Ray.1973.Thebaserulesfor
prepositionalphrases.InStephenR.
AndersonandPaulKiparsky,editors,A
FestschriftforMorrisHalle.Holt,Rinehart,
andWinstonInc.,NewYork,
pages345–356.
Jackendoff,Ray.1983.Semanticsand
Cognition.MITPress,Cambridge,MA.
Jackendoff,Ray.1990.SemanticStructures.
MITPress,Cambridge,MA.
Jensen,KarenandJean-LouisBinot.1987.
Disambiguatingprepositionalphrase
attachmentsbyusingon-linedictionary
deﬁnitions.ComputationalLinguistics,
13(3–4):251–260.
Jensen,PerAnkerandJ.FischerNilsson.
2003.Ontology-basedsemanticsfor
prepositions.InProceedingsofthe
142
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguistic
DimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUsein
ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsand
Applications,pages193–204,Toulouse.
Johnston,MichaelandFredericaBusa.1996.
Qualiastructureandthecompositional
interpretationofcompounds.In
ProceedingsoftheACLSIGLEXWorkshopon
BreadthandDepthofSemanticLexicons,
pages77–88,SantaCruz,CA.
Jørgensen,FredrikandJanToreLønning.
2009.Aminimalrecursionsemantic
analysisoflocatives.Computational
Linguistics,35(2):229–270.
Kamp,Hans.1981.Theoryoftruthand
semanticrepresentation.InB.J.Janssen
andT.M.V.Stokhof,editors,Formal
MethodsintheStudyofLanguage.
MathematischCentrum,Amsterdam,
pages277–322.
Kelleher,JohnandJosefvanGenabith.2003.
Acomputationalmodelofthereferential
semanticsofprojectiveprepositions.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages181–192,
Toulouse.
Kelleher,JohnD.andFintanJ.Costello.
2009.Applyingcomputationalmodelsof
spatialprepositionstovisuallysituated
dialog.ComputationalLinguistics,
35(2):271–306.
Kelleher,JohnD.andGeert-JanM.Kruijff.
2005.Acontext-dependentmodelof
proximityinphysicallysituated
environments.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages128–137,
Colchester.
Kim,SuNamandTimothyBaldwin.2006.
AutomaticidentiﬁcationofEnglishverb
particleconstructionsusinglinguistic
features.InProceedingsoftheThird
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages65–72,Trento.
Kim,SuNamandTimothyBaldwin.2007.
DetectingcompositionalityofEnglish
verb-particleconstructionsusingsemantic
similarity.InProceedingsofthe7thMeeting
ofthePaciﬁcAssociationforComputational
Linguistics(PACLING2007),pages40–48,
Melbourne.
Kim,SuNamandTimothyBaldwin(in
press).Howtopickouttokeninstancesof
Englishverb-particleconstructions.
LanguageResourcesandEvaluation.
Kipper,Karin,HoaTrangDang,andMartha
Palmer.2000.Class-basedconstructionofa
verblexicon.InProceedingsofthe18th
AnnualConferenceonArtiﬁcialIntelligence
(AAAI-2000),pages691–696,Austin,TX.
Kipper,Karin,BenjaminSnyder,andMartha
Palmer.2004.Usingprepositionstoextend
averblexicon.InProceedingsofthe
HLT-NAACL2004Workshopon
ComputationalLexicalSemantics,
pages23–29,Boston,MA.
KipperSchuler,Karin.2005.VerbNet:A
Broad-coverage,ComprehensiveVerbLexicon.
Ph.D.thesis,UniversityofPennsylvania.
Klein,DanandChristopherD.Manning.
2003.Accurateunlexicalizedparsing.In
Proceedingsofthe41stAnnualMeetingofthe
ACL,pages423–430,Sapporo.
Kna´s,Iwona.2006.Polishequivalentsof
spatialat.InProceedingsoftheThird
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages9–16,Trento.
Kokkinakis,Dimitris.2000.Supervised
PP-attachmentforSwedish:Combining
unsupervisedandsupervisedtraining
data.NordicJournalofLinguistics,
3(2):191–213.
Kordoni,Valia.2003a.Thekeyroleof
semanticsinthedevelopmentof
large-scalegrammarsofnaturallanguage.
InProceedingsofthe10thConferenceofthe
EACL(EACL2003),pages111–14,
Budapest.
Kordoni,Valia.2003b.Arobustdeepanalysis
ofindirectprepositionalarguments.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages112–120,
Toulouse.
Kordoni,Valia.2006.Prepositional
argumentsinamultilingualcontext.In
Saint-Dizier(Saint-Dizier2006a).
Korhonen,Anna.2002.Subcategorization
Acquisition.Ph.D.thesis,Universityof
Cambridge.
Kozareva,Zornitsa.2006.Bootstrapping
namedentityrecognitionwith
automaticallygeneratedgazetteerlists.In
ProceedingsoftheEACL2006Student
ResearchWorkshop,pages15–21,Trento.
Kracht,Marcus.2003.Directionality
selection.InProceedingsofthe
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguistic
DimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUsein
ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsand
Applications,pages89–100,Toulouse.
Krenn,Brigitte.2008.Descriptionof
evaluationresource—GermanPP-verb
143
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
data.InProceedingsoftheLREC2008
Workshop:TowardsaSharedTaskfor
MultiwordExpressions(MWE2008),
pages7–10,Marrakech.
Krenn,BrigitteandStefanEvert.2001.Can
wedobetterthanfrequency?Acasestudy
onextractingPP-verbcollocations.In
ProceedingsoftheACL/EACL2001Workshop
ontheComputationalExtraction,Analysis
andExploitationofCollocations,pages39–46,
Toulouse.
KumarNaskar,SudipandSivaji
Bandyopadhyay.2006.Handlingof
prepositionsinEnglishtoBengalimachine
translation.InProceedingsoftheThird
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages89–94,Trento.
Lassen,Tine.2006.Anontology-basedview
ofprepositionalsenses.InProceedingsofthe
ThirdACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages45–50,Trento.
Lauer,Mark.1995.DesigningStatistical
LanguageLearners:ExperimentsonNoun
Compounds.Ph.D.thesis,Macquarie
University.
Leroy,GondyandHsinchunChen.2002.
Fillingpreposition-basedtemplatesto
captureinformationfrommedical
abstracts.InProceedingsofthePaciﬁc
SymposiumonBiocomputing2002,
pages350–61,Lihue,HI.
Leroy,Gondy,HsinchunChen,andJesseD.
Martinez.2003.Ashallowparserbasedon
closed-classwordstocapturerelationsin
biomedicaltext.JournalofBiomedical
Informatics,36:145–158.
Lersundi,MikelandEnekoAgirre.2003.
Semanticinterpretationsofpostpositions
andprepositions:Amultilingualinventory
forBasque,EnglishandSpanish.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andTheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages56–65,
Toulouse.
Lestrade,S.A.M.2006.Markedadpositions.
InProceedingsoftheThirdACL-SIGSEM
WorkshoponPrepositions,pages23–28,
Trento.
Levi,JudithN.1978.TheSyntaxandSemantics
ofComplexNominals.AcademicPress,
NewYork.
Levin,BethandMalkaRappaport-Hovav(in
press).Lexicalconceptualstructure.In
ClaudiaMaienborn,KlausvonHeusinger,
andPaulPortner,editors,Semantics:An
InternationalHandbookofNaturalLanguage
Meaning.MoutondeGruyter,Berlin,
Germany.
Li,Wei,XiuhongZhang,ChengNiu,Yuankai
Jiang,andRohiniK.Srihari.2003.An
expertlexiconapproachtoidentifying
Englishphrasalverbs.InProceedingsofthe
41stAnnualMeetingoftheACL,
pages513–520,Sapporo.
Lin,Dekang.1998.Automaticretrieval
andclusteringofsimilarwords.In
Proceedingsofthe36thAnnualMeeting
oftheACLand17thInternational
ConferenceonComputationalLinguistics
(COLING/ACL-98),pages768–774,
Montreal.
Lin,Dekang.2003.Dependency-based
evaluationofMINIPAR.InAnneAbeill´e,
editor,BuildingandUsingSyntactically
AnnotatedCorpora.Kluwer,Dordrecht,
Netherlands,pages317–330.
Lindstromberg,Seth.1998.English
PrepositionsExplained.JohnBenjamins,
Amsterdam,Netherlands.
Lindstromberg,Seth.2001.Preposition
entriesinUKmonolinguallearner’s
dictionaries:Problemsandpossible
solutions.AppliedLinguistics,22(1):79–103.
Litkowski,KenandOrinHargraves.2005.
ThePrepositionProject.InProceedingsof
theSecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages171–179,
Colchester.
Litkowski,KennethC.2002.Digraph
analysisofdictionarypreposition
deﬁnitions.InProceedingsoftheACL-02
WorkshoponWordSenseDisambiguation:
RecentSuccessesandFutureDirections,
pages9–16,Philadelphia,PA.
Litkowski,KennethC.andOrinHargraves.
2006.Coverageandinheritanceinthe
prepositionproject.InProceedingsofthe
ThirdACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages37–44,Trento.
Litkowski,KennethC.andOrinHargraves.
2007.SemEval-2007task06:Word-sense
disambiguationofprepositions.In
Proceedingsofthe4thInternationalWorkshop
onSemanticEvaluations,pages24–29,
Prague.
MacKinlay,AndrewandTimothyBaldwin.
2005.POStaggingwithamoreinformative
tagset.InProceedingsoftheAustralasian
LanguageTechnologyWorkshop2005,
pages40–48,Sydney.
Manning,ChristopherD.1993.Automatic
acquisitionofalargesubcategorization
dictionaryfromcorpora.InProceedingsof
the31stAnnualMeetingoftheACL,
pages235–242,Columbus,OH.
144
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
Manning,ChristopherD.,Prabhakar
Raghavan,andHinrichSch¨utze.2008.
IntroductiontoInformationRetrieval.
CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,
UK.
Marcus,MitchellP.,BeatriceSantorini,and
MaryAnnMarcinkiewicz.1993.Buildinga
largeannotatedcorpusofEnglish:the
Penntreebank.ComputationalLinguistics,
19(2):313–330.
McCarthy,Diana,BillKeller,andJohn
Carroll.2003.Detectingacontinuumof
compositionalityinphrasalverbs.In
ProceedingsoftheACL-2003Workshopon
MultiwordExpressions:Analysis,
AcquisitionandTreatment,pages73–80,
Sapporo.
Merlo,Paola.2003.Generalised
PP-attachmentdisambiguationusing
corpus-basedlinguisticdiagnostics.In
Proceedingsofthe10thConferenceofthe
EACL(EACL2003),pages251–258,
Budapest.
Merlo,Paola,MatthewW.Crocker,and
CathyBerthouzoz.1997.Attaching
multipleprepositionalphrases:
Generalizedbacked-offestimation.In
Proceedingsofthe2ndConferenceon
EmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
Processing(EMNLP-97),pages149–155,
Providence,RI.
Merlo,PaolaandEvaEsteveFerrer.2006.
Thenotionofargumentinprepositional
phraseattachment.Computational
Linguistics,32(3):341–377.
Miller,GeorgeA.andPhilipN.
Johnson-Laird.1976.Languageand
Perception.CambridgeUniversityPress,
Cambridge,UK.
Mitchell,Brian.2004.PrepositionalPhrase
AttachmentUsingMachineLearning
Algorithms.Ph.D.thesis,Universityof
Shefﬁeld.
Muischnek,Kadri,KailiM¨u¨urisep,andTiina
Puolakainen.2005.Adpositionsin
Estoniancomputationalsyntax.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages2–10,Colchester.
Muslea,Ion.1999.Extractionpatternsfor
informationextractiontasks:Asurvey.In
ProceedingsoftheAAAI-99Workshopon
MachineLearningforInformationExtraction,
pages1–6,Orlando,FL.
N¨ubel,Rita.1996.Knowledgesourcesforthe
disambiguationofprepositionsinmachine
translation.InProceedingsofthePRICAI-96
WorkshoponFutureIssuesforMulti-lingual
TextProcessing,Cairns.Availableat
ftp://ftp.mpce.mq.edu.au/pub/comp/
mri/nlp/fimtp/nuebel.ps.gz.
Odijk,Jan.2004.Reusablelexical
representationsforidioms.InProceedings
ofthe4thInternationalConferenceon
LanguageResourcesandEvaluation(LREC
2004),pages903–906,Lisbon.
O’Hara,TomandJanyceWiebe.2003.
Prepositionsemanticclassiﬁcationvia
TreebankandFrameNet.InProceedingsof
the7thConferenceonNaturalLanguage
Learning(CoNLL-2003),pages79–86,
Edmonton.
O’Hara,TomandJanyceWiebe.2009.
Exploitingsemanticroleresourcesfor
prepositiondisambiguation.Computational
Linguistics,35(2):151–184.
Old,L.John.2003.Ananalysisofsemantic
overlapamongEnglishprepositions
fromtheRoget’sThesaurus.InProceedings
oftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages13–19,
Toulouse.
Olteanu,MarianandDanMoldovan.2005.
PP-attachmentdisambiguationusinglarge
context.InProceedingsofthe2005
ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
LanguageProcessing(EMNLP2005),
pages273–280,Vancouver.
Olteanu,MarianG.2004.Prepositional
phraseattachmentambiguityresolution
througharichsyntactic,lexicaland
semanticsetoffeaturesappliedinsupport
vectormachineslearner.Master’sthesis,
UniversityofTexas,Dallas.
Ono,Toshihide,HaretsuguHishigaki,Akira
Tanigami,andToshihisaTakagi.2001.
Automatedextractionofinformationon
protein-proteininteractionsfromthe
biologicalliterature.Bioinformatics,
17(2):155–161.
Pantel,PatrickandDekangLin.2000.An
unsupervisedapproachtoprepositional
phraseattachmentusingcontextually
similarwords.InProceedingsofthe38th
AnnualMeetingoftheACL,pages101–108,
HongKong.
Patrick,JonandJeremyFletcher.2005.
Classifyingverbparticleconstructionsby
verbarguments.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages200–209,
Colchester.
145
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Pearsall,Judy,editor.1998.TheNewOxford
DictionaryofEnglish.ClarendonPress,
Oxford,UK.
Pecina,Pavel.2008.Amachinelearning
approachtomultiwordexpression
extraction.InProceedingsoftheLREC2008
Workshop:TowardsaSharedTaskfor
MultiwordExpressions(MWE2008),
pages54–57,Marrakech.
Pereira,FernandoC.N.1985.Anew
characterizationofattachmentpreferences.
InDavidR.Dowty,LauriKarttunen,and
ArnoldM.Zwicky,editors,Natural
LanguageParsing:Psychological,
ComputationalandTheoreticalPerspectives.
CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,
UK,pages307–319.
Popescu,Octavian,SaraTonelli,and
EmanuelePianta.2007.IRST-BP:
Prepositiondisambiguationbasedon
chainclarifyingrelationshipscontexts.In
Proceedingsofthe4thInternationalWorkshop
onSemanticEvaluations,pages191–194,
Prague.
Pratt,IanandNissimFrancez.1997.Onthe
semanticsoftemporalprepositionsand
prepositionphrases.TechnicalReport
LCL9701,ComputerScienceDepartment,
Technion,Haifa,Israel.
Pustejovsky,J.,J.Castano,R.Saur´ı,
A.Rumshinsky,J.Zhang,andW.Luo.
2002.Medstract:Creatinglarge-scale
informationserversforbiomedical
libraries.InProceedingsoftheACL2002
WorkshoponNaturalLanguageProcessingin
theBiomedicalDomain,pages85–92,
Philadelphia,PA.
Pustejovsky,James.1995.TheGenerative
Lexicon.MITPress,Cambridge,MA.
Quirk,Chris,ArulMenezes,andColin
Cherry.2005.Dependencytreelet
translation:Syntacticallyinformedphrasal
SMT.InProceedingsofthe43rdAnnual
MeetingoftheACL,pages271–279,Ann
Arbor,MI.
Quirk,Randolph,SidneyGreenbaum,
GeoffreyLeech,andJanSvartvik.1985.A
ComprehensiveGrammaroftheEnglish
Language.Longman,London.
Ramsay,Allan.2005.Prepositionsas
abstractrelations.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages30–38,
Colchester.
Ratnaparkhi,Adwait,JeffReynar,andSalim
Roukos.1994.Amaximumentropymodel
forprepositionalphraseattachment.In
ProceedingsoftheARPAHumanLanguage
TechnologyWorkshop,pages250–255,
Princeton,NJ.
Rauh,Gisa.1993.Onthegrammaroflexical
andnon-lexicalprepositionsinEnglish.In
Zelinski-Wibbelt(Zelinski-Wibbelt1993),
pages99–150.
Rehbein,InesandJosefvanGenabith.2006.
Germanparticleverbsandpleonastic
prepositions.InProceedingsoftheThird
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponPrepositions,
pages57–64,Trento.
Reichelt,ThorstenandEtienneVerleih.2005.
B3D—asystemforthedescriptionand
calculationofspatialprepositions.In
ProceedingsoftheSecondACL-SIGSEM
WorkshopontheLinguisticDimensionsof
PrepositionsandtheirUseinComputational
LinguisticsFormalismsandApplications,
pages101–109,Colchester.
Resnik,PhilipandMonaDiab.2000.
Measuringverbsimilarity.InProceedingsof
the22ndAnnualMeetingoftheCognitive
ScienceSociety(CogSci2000),
pages399–404,Philadelphia,PA.
Resnik,PhilipandMartiA.Hearst.1993.
Structuralambiguityandconceptual
relations.InProceedingsoftheWorkshopon
VeryLargeCorpora:AcademicandIndustrial
Perspectives,pages58–64,Columbus,OH.
Richards,Barry,IngeBethke,Jaapvander
Does,andJonOberlander.1989.Temporal
RepresentationandInference.Academic
Press,London.
Riloff,Ellen.1995.Littlewordscanmakea
bigdifferencefortextclassiﬁcation.In
Proceedingsof18thInternationalACM-SIGIR
ConferenceonResearchandDevelopmentin
InformationRetrieval(SIGIR’95),
pages130–136,Seattle,WA.
R¨ohrer,Christian.1977.Howtodeﬁne
temporalconjunctions.Linguistische
BerichteBraunschweig,51:1–11.
Sablayrolles,Pierre.1995.Thesemanticsof
motion.InProceedingsofthe7thConference
oftheEuropeanChapteroftheAssociationfor
ComputationalLinguistics(EACL’95),
pages281–283,Dublin.
Sag,Ivan,TimothyBaldwin,FrancisBond,
AnnCopestake,andDanFlickinger.
2002.Multiwordexpressions:Apain
intheneckforNLP.InProceedingsofthe
3rdInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
TextProcessingandComputational
Linguistics(CICLing-2002),pages1–15,
MexicoCity.
Saint-Dizier,Patrick.2005.Anoverviewof
PrepNet:abstractnotions,framesand
inferentialpatterns.InProceedingsofthe
146
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages155–169,
Colchester.
Saint-Dizier,Patrick,editor.2006a.
ComputationalLinguisticsDimensionsof
SyntaxandSemanticsofPrepositions.
KluwerAcademic,Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Saint-Dizier,Patrick.2006b.PrepNet:a
multilinguallexicaldescriptionof
prepositions.InProceedingsofthe5th
InternationalConferenceonLanguage
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2006),
pages877–885,Genoa.
Saint-Dizier,Patrick.2008.Syntacticand
semanticframesinPrepNet.InProceedings
ofthe3rdInternationalJointConferenceon
NaturalLanguageProcessing(IJCNLP-08),
pages763–768,Hyderabad.
Saint-Dizier,PatrickandGloriaVazquez.
2001.Acompositionalframeworkfor
prepositions.InProceedingsoftheFourth
InternationalWorkshoponComputational
Semantics(IWCS-4),pages165–179,
Tilburg.
SchulteimWalde,Sabine.2004.
Identiﬁcation,quantitativedescription,
andpreliminarydistributionalanalysisof
Germanparticleverbs.InProceedingsofthe
COLINGWorkshoponEnhancingandUsing
ElectronicDictionaries,pages85–88,Geneva.
Schuman,JonathanandSabineBergler.2006.
Postnominalprepositionalphrase
attachmentinproteomics.InProceedingsof
theHLT-NAACL06BioNLPWorkshopon
LinkingNaturalLanguageProcessingand
Biology,pages82–89,NewYork.
Sch¨utze,Carson.1995.PPattachmentand
argumenthood.InCarsonT.Sch¨utze,
JenniferB.Ganger,andKevinBroihier,
editors,PapersonLanguageProcessingand
Acquisition,volume26.MITWorking
PapersinLinguistics,Cambridge,MA,
pages95–152.
Schwartz,Lee,TakakoAikawa,andChris
Quirk.2003.DisambiguationofEnglishPP
attachmentusingmultilingualaligned
data.InProceedingsoftheNinthMachine
TranslationSummit(MTSummitIX),New
Orleans,LA.Availableatwww.amtaweb.
org/summit/MTSummit/FinalPapers/
39-Aikawa-final.pdf.
Shaked,NavaA.1993.Howdowecount?
Theproblemoftaggingphrasalverbsin
parts.InProceedingsofthe31stAnnual
MeetingoftheACL,pages289–291,
Columbus,OH.
Sharoff,Serge.2004.Whatisatstake:Acase
studyofRussianexpressionsstartingwith
apreposition.InProceedingsoftheACL
2004WorkshoponMultiwordExpressions:
IntegratingProcessing,pages17–23,
Barcelona.
Sopena,JosepM.,AgustiLloberas,and
JoanL.Moliner.1998.Aconnectionist
approachtoprepositionalphrase
attachmentforrealworldtexts.In
Proceedingsofthe36thAnnualMeetingofthe
ACLand17thInternationalConferenceon
ComputationalLinguistics
(COLING/ACL-98),pages1233–1237,
Montreal.
Sp¨arckJones,KarenandBranimirBoguraev.
1987.Anoteonastudyofcases.
ComputationalLinguistics,13(1–2):65–8.
Spivey-Knowlton,MichaelandJulieC.
Sedivy.1995.Resolvingattachment
ambiguitieswithmultipleconstraints.
Cognition,55:227–267.
Srihari,Rohini,ChengNiu,andWeiLi.2000.
Ahybridapproachfornamedentityand
sub-typetagging.InProceedingsofthe6th
ConferenceonAppliedNaturalLanguage
Processing(ANLP),pages247–254,Seattle,
WA.
Stamou,Soﬁa,KemalOﬂazer,KarelPala,
DimitrisChristoudoulakis,DanCristea,
DanTuﬁ SvetlaKoeva,GeorgeTotkov,
DominiqueDutoit,andMaria
Grigoriadou.2002.BALKANET:A
multilingualsemanticnetworkforthe
Balkanlanguages.InProceedingsofthe
InternationalWordnetConference,
pages12–14,Mysore.
Stetina,JiriandMakotoNagao.1997.
CorpusbasedPPattachmentambiguity
resolutionwithasemanticdictionary.
InProceedingsofthe5thAnnualWorkshop
onVeryLargeCorpora,pages66–80,
HongKong.
Talmy,Len.1985.Lexicalizationpatterns:
Semanticstructureinlexicalforms.In
TimothyShopen,editor,Grammatical
CategoriesandtheLexicon.Cambridge
UniversityPress,Cambridge,UK,
pages57–149.
Talmy,Leonard.1988.Forcedynamicsin
languageandcognition.CognitiveScience,
12:49–100.
Tetreault,JoelR.andMartinChodorow.
2008a.Nativejudgmentsofnon-native
usage:Experimentsinprepositionerror
detection.InColing2008:Proceedingsofthe
WorkshoponHumanJudgementsin
ComputationalLinguistics,pages24–32,
Manchester.
147
ComputationalLinguistics Volume35,Number2
Tetreault,JoelR.andMartinChodorow.
2008b.Theupsanddownsofpreposition
errordetectioninESLwriting.In
Proceedingsofthe22ndInternational
ConferenceonComputationalLinguistics
(COLING2008),pages865–872,
Manchester.
Tokunaga,Takenobu,TomofumiKoyama,
andSuguruSaito.2005.Meaningof
Japanesespatialnouns.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages93–100,
Colchester.
Toral,Antonio.2005.DRAMNERI:Afree
knowledgebasedtooltonamedentity
recognition.InProceedingsoftheFirstFree
SoftwareTechnologiesConference,
pages27–32,Corunna.
Toutanova,KristinaandChristoperD.
Manning.2000.Enrichingtheknowledge
sourcesusedinamaximumentropy
part-of-speechtagger.InProceedingsofthe
JointSIGDATConferenceonEmpirical
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessingand
VeryLargeCorpora(EMNLP/VLC-2000),
pages63–70,HongKong.
Toutanova,Kristina,ChristopherD.
Manning,andAndrewY.Ng.2004.
Learningrandomwalkmodelsfor
inducingworddependencydistributions.
InProceedingsofthe21stInternational
ConferenceonMachineLearning,
pages815–822,Banff.
Toutanova,KristinaandHisamiSuzuki.
2007.Generatingcasemarkersin
machinetranslation.InProceedingsof
HumanLanguageTechnologies2007:The
ConferenceoftheNorthAmericanChapterof
theAssociationforComputationalLinguistics,
pages49–56,Rochester,NY.
Trawi´nski,Beata.2003.Combinatorial
aspectsofPPsheadedbyraising
prepositions.InProceedingsofthe
ACL-SIGSEMWorkshopontheLinguistic
DimensionsofPrepositionsandtheirUsein
ComputationalLinguisticsFormalismsand
Applications,pages157–168,Toulouse.
Trawi´nski,Beata.2005.Preposition–pronoun
contractioninPolish.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages20–29,
Colchester.
Trawi´nski,Beata.2006.Aquantitative
approachtopreposition-pronoun
contractioninPolish.InProceedingsofthe
ThirdACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages17–22,Trento.
Trawinski,Beata,ManfredSailer,and
Jan-PhilippSoehn.2006.Combinatorial
aspectsofcollocationalprepositional
phrases.InSaint-Dizier(Saint-Dizier
2006a).
Trujillo,Arturo.1995.LexicalistMachine
TranslationofSpatialPrepositions.Ph.D.
thesis,UniversityofCambridge.
Tseng,Jesse.2004.Prepositionsand
complementselection.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages11–19,
Colchester.
Tseng,JesseL.2000.TheRepresentationand
SelectionofPrepositions.Ph.D.thesis,
UniversityofEdinburgh.
Tyler,AndreaandVyvyanEvans.2003.The
SemanticsofEnglishPrepositions:Spatial
Scenes,EmbodiedMeaning,andCognition.
CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,
UK.
vanderBeek,Leonoor.2005.Theextraction
ofdeterminerlessPPs.InProceedingsofthe
SecondACL-SIGSEMWorkshoponthe
LinguisticDimensionsofPrepositionsand
theirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages190–199,
Colchester.
vanHerwijnen,Olga,JacquesTerken,Antal
vandenBosch,andErwinMarsi.2003.
LearningPPattachmentforﬁltering
prosodicphrasing.InProceedingsofthe10th
ConferenceoftheEACL(EACL2003),
pages139–146,Budapest.
VilladaMoir´on,Bego˜na.2005.Data-driven
identiﬁcationofﬁxedexpressionsandtheir
modiﬁability.Ph.D.thesis,Alfa-Informatica,
UniversityofGroningen.
Villavicencio,Aline.2005.Theavailabilityof
verb-particleconstructionsinlexical
resources:Howmuchisenough?Computer
SpeechandLanguage,19(4):415–432.
Villavicencio,Aline.2006.Verb-particle
constructionsintheWorldWideWeb.In
Saint-Dizier(2006a).
Volk,Martin.2001.ExploitingtheWWWasa
corpustoresolvePPattachment
ambiguities.InProceedingsofCorpus
Linguistics2001,pages601–606,Lancaster.
Volk,Martin.2002.Combiningunsupervised
andsupervisedmethodsforPP
attachmentdisambiguation.InProceedings
ofthe19thInternationalConferenceon
ComputationalLinguistics(COLING2002),
pages1–7,Taipei.
148
Baldwin,Kordoni,andVillavicencio ASurveyofPrepositionsinApplications
Volk,Martin.2003.Germanprepositionsand
theirkin.Asurveywithrespecttothe
resolutionofPPattachmentambiguities.
InProceedingsoftheACL-SIGSEMWorkshop
ontheLinguisticDimensionsofPrepositions
andtheirUseinComputationalLinguistics
FormalismsandApplications,pages77–85,
Toulouse.
Volk,Martin.2006.Howbadistheproblem
ofPP-attachment?AcomparisonofEnglish,
German,andSwedish.InProceedingsofthe
ThirdACL-SIGSEMWorkshopon
Prepositions,pages81–88,Trento.
Vossen,Piek,editor.1998.EuroWordNet:A
MultilingualDatabasewithLexicalSemantic
Networks.KluwerAcademic,Dordrecht,
Netherlands.
Wasow,Thomas.2002.PostverbalBehavior.
CSLIPublications,Stanford,CA.
Whittemore,GregandKathleenFerrara.
1990.Empiricalstudyofpredictivepowers
ofsimpleattachmentschemesfor
post-modiﬁerprepositionalphrases.In
Proceedingsofthe28thAnnualMeetingofthe
ACL,pages23–30,Pittsburgh,PA.
Wilks,Yorick,XiumingHuang,andDan
Fass.1985.Syntax,preferenceandright
attachment.InProceedingsofthe9th
InternationalJointConferenceonArtiﬁcial
Intelligence(IJCAI-85),pages779–784,Los
Angeles,CA.
Wood,FrederickT.1979.EnglishPrepositional
Idioms.Macmillan,London.
Xu,YilunDiannaandNormanI.Badler.
2000.Algorithmsforgeneratingmotion
trajectoriesdescribedbyprepositions.In
ProceedingsofComputerAnimation2000
(CA’00),pages30–35,Washington,DC.
Ye,PatrickandTimothyBaldwin.2006.
Semanticrolelabelingofprepositional
phrases.ACMTransactionsonAsian
LanguageInformationProcessing,
5(3):228–244.
Ye,PatrickandTimothyBaldwin.2007.
MELB-YB:Prepositionsense
disambiguationusingrichsemantic
features.InProceedingsofthe4th
InternationalWorkshoponSemantic
Evaluations,pages241–244,Prague.
Yeh,AlexanderS.andMarcB.Vilain.
1998.Somepropertiesofpreposition
andsubordinateconjunction
attachments.InProceedingsofthe36th
AnnualMeetingoftheACLand17th
InternationalConferenceonComputational
Linguistics:COLING/ACL-98,
pages1436–1442,Montreal.
Yuret,Deniz.2007.KU:Wordsense
disambiguationbysubstitution.In
Proceedingsofthe4thInternationalWorkshop
onSemanticEvaluations,pages207–214,
Prague.
Zavrel,Jakub,WalterDaelemans,and
JornVeenstra.1997.ResolvingPP
attachmentambiguitieswith
memory-basedlearning.InProceedings
oftheConferenceonComputational
NaturalLanguageLearning(CoNLL-97),
pages136–144,Madrid.
Zelinski-Wibbelt,Cornelia,editor.1993.
TheSemanticsofPrepositions:From
MentalProcessingtoNaturalLanguage
Processing.MoutondeGruyter,Berlin,
Germany.
Zhao,ShaojunandDekangLin.2004.A
nearest-neighbormethodforresolving
PP-attachmentambiguity.InProceedingsof
theFirstInternationalJointConferenceon
NaturalLanguageProcessing(IJCNLP-04),
pages545–554,HainanIsland.
149


