Book Review
Spoken Dialogue Systems
Kristiina Jokinen and Michael McTear
(UniversityofHelsinki,UniversityofUlster)
Princeton,NJ:Morgan&Claypool(SynthesisLecturesonLanguage
Technologies,editedbyGraemeHirst,volume5),2009,xiv+151pp;
paperback,ISBN978-1-59829-599-3,$40.00;ebook,ISBN978-1-59829-600-6,
doi10.2200/S00204ED1V01Y200910HLT005,$30.00orbysubscription
Reviewed by
Mary Ellen Foster
Heriot-Watt University
This book gives a short but comprehensive overview of the ﬁeld of spoken dialogue
systems, outlining the issues involved in building and evaluating this type of system
andmakingliberaluseoftechniquesandexamplesfromawiderangeofimplemented
systems.Itprovidesanexcellentreviewoftheresearch,withparticularlyrelevantdis-
cussions of error handling and system evaluation, and is suitable both as an intro-
ductiontothisresearchareaandasasurveyofcurrentstate-of-the-arttechniques.
The book is structured into seven chapters. Chapter 1 provides an introduction to
theresearchareaandbrieﬂyintroducesthetopicscoveredinthebook.Theendofthe
chapterconsistsofalistoflinkstotoolsandcomponentsthatcanbeusedfordialogue
systemdevelopment,which—althoughcurrentlyuseful—seemslikelytogooutofdate
quickly.
Chapter 2 addresses the task of dialogue management, beginning by describing
simple graphand frame-based methods for dialogue control, and continuing with a
discussionofVoiceXML.Thechapterendswithanextendeddiscussionofrecentwork
in statistical approaches to dialogue control and modeling. It is unfortunate that the
discussion of other methods such as the information state approach and plan-based
modelsispostponedtoChapter4,butotherwisethischapterprovidesagoodsummary
ofbothclassicandrecentapproaches.
Chapter3discusseserrorhandling,whichisdividedintothreeprocesses:errorde-
tection,errorprediction(i.e.,theonlinepredictionoferrorsbasedondialoguefeatures),
anderrorrecovery.Aftersurveyingarangeofpreviousapproachestothesethreesub-
tasks, the authors go on to discuss several more recent, data-driven approaches. Error
handling is both a vital component of any spoken dialogue system designed for real-
worlduseandanactiveareaofcurrentresearch,sothiscompactsummaryoftechniques
andissuesiswelcome.
Chapter 4 contains case studies illustrating a range of dialogue control strategies
and models. It begins with a description of the information state approach, and then
moves on to discuss plan-based approaches as exempliﬁed in the TRAINS and TRIPS
projects.Thisisfollowedbyadiscussionoftwosystemsthatemploysoftwareagentsfor
dialoguemanagement:theQueen’sCommunicatorandtheAthosMailsystem.Finally,
twosystemswhichmakeuseofstatisticalmodelsarepresented:theMicrosoftBayesian
receptionist, which models conversation as decision making under uncertainty, and
the DIHANA system, which employs corpus-based dialogue management. The case
studiesinthischapterprovide detailedexamplesofarangeoftechniques, alongwith
ComputationalLinguistics Volume36,Number4
somediscussionoftheadvantagesanddisadvantagesofeachapproach,addingtothe
relevanceofthebookfordevelopersoffuturedialoguesystems.
Chapter 5 discusses four aspects of spoken dialogue systems that go beyond the
straightforwardinformationexchangescenariosconsideredintheprecedingchapters.
The ﬁrst section covers aspects of collaborative planning along with Jokinen’s (2009)
ConstructiveDialogueModelingapproach.Thesectiononadaptationandusermodel-
ingprovidesabriefbutusefulsurveyofapproachestothistask.Thediscussionofmul-
timodalityislongerandmoreconcrete,butconcentratesalmostentirelyonmultimodal
inputprocessing;itwouldhavebeenhelpfultoincludeasimilarsummaryoftheissues
involved in multimodal output generation. The ﬁnal section on “natural interaction”
brieﬂy discusses two topics: non-verbal communication for embodied conversational
agentsandmultimodalcorpusannotation.
Chapter 6—the longest in the book—gives a thorough treatment of the issues in-
volvedinevaluatingspokendialoguesystems,beginningwithanhistoricaloverview.
It continues with a discussion of terminology and techniques and describes a wide
range of subjective and objective evaluation measures that have been applied to the
evaluation task. Next, two frameworks are presented that are designed to provide a
general methodology for evaluation: PARADISE (Walker et al. 1997) and Quality of
Experience (M¨oller 2005). This is followed by a discussion of concepts from HCI-style
usability evaluations and how they can be applied to spoken dialogue systems, and
then a section dealing with semiautomatic evaluation and the role of standardization.
The ﬁnal section discusses challenges that arise when evaluating advanced dialogue
systems incorporating multimodality and adaptivity, and when evaluating systems
designedforreal-worldapplications.
Finally, Chapter 7 brieﬂy discusses conversational dialogue systems (i.e., com-
panion/chatbotsystems),whoseemphasisisonsocialcommunicationratherthanthe
information exchange tasks considered for most of the book. It also addresses the
relationshipbetweencommercialandacademicapproachestospokendialogue.
Itisinterestingtonotethatbothoftheauthorshavealsowrittenbooksoftheirown
thataddressaspectsofspokendialoguesystems:McTear(2004)givesacomprehensive
overview of the research area, including a series of hands-on tutorials on building
systems using tools such as the CSLU toolkit and VoiceXML, and Jokinen (2009) pro-
videsadetaileddescriptionofaparticularstyleofdialoguemanagement,Constructive
DialogueModeling.
This book ﬁlls a different niche: It has neither the exercises and tutorials of the
McTear book,northein-depthdescription ofasingle formalism provided byJokinen.
Instead,itconcentratesonoutliningtheissuesinvolvedinbuildingaspokendialogue
system and on describing a wide range of existing techniques and systems. Although
the book is short, it provides an excellent starting point for researchers new to the
ﬁeld, and every section has a good selection of references which would easily allow
theinterestedreadertofollowupanyparticulartopicinmoredepth.Thechapterson
errorhandlingandevaluationprovideparticularlyusefulsummariesoftheissuesand
techniquesintheseactiveresearchareas.
Althoughtheprefacesaysthatthebookisaimedatbothengineeringandhumani-
tiesstudents,Isuspectthatreaderswithoutanymathematicalbackgroundwouldhave
difﬁculty with some of the more formal sections. However, the necessary background
knowledgeisnotgreat,andingeneralthebookisclearlywrittenandunderstandable;
itissuitableasbothanintroductiontothisresearchareaandasurveyofcurrentstate-
of-the-arttechniques.
782
BookReview
References
Jokinen,K.2009. Constructive Dialogue
Modelling: Speech Interaction and Rational
Agents.WileySeriesinAgentTechnology.
JohnWiley&Sons,Ltd.,Hoboken,NJ.
McTear,M.F.2004. Spoken Dialogue
Technology: Toward the Conversational User
Interface.Springer-Verlag,Berlin.
M¨oller,S.2005. Quality of Telephone-Based
Spoken Dialogue Systems.Springer,
NewYork.
Walker,M.A.,D.J.Litman,C.A.Kamm,and
A.Abella.1997.PARADISE:aframework
forevaluatingspokendialogueagents.In
Proceedings of EACL 1997,pages271–280,
Madrid.
This book review was edited by Pierre Isabelle.
Mary Ellen Foster is a research fellow in the Interaction Lab of the School of Mathematical and
Computer Sciences at Heriot-WattUniversity. Her research interests includeembodied commu-
nication,naturallanguagegeneration,andmultimodaldialoguesystems.HeraddressisSchool
of Mathematical and Computer Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh EH14 4AS, United
Kingdom;e-mail:M.E.Foster@hw.ac.uk.
783


