Squibs
OnParaphraseandCoreference
Marta Recasens
∗
University of Barcelona
Marta Vila
∗∗
University of Barcelona
Byprovidingabetterunderstandingofparaphraseandcoreferenceintermsofsimilaritiesand
differencesintheirlinguisticnature,thisarticledelimitswhatthefocusofparaphraseextraction
andcoreferenceresolutiontasksshouldbe,andtowhatextenttheycanhelpeachother.Weargue
fortherelevanceofthisdiscussiontoNaturalLanguageProcessing.
1.Introduction
Paraphrase extraction
1
and coreference resolution have applications in Question An-
swering, Information Extraction, Machine Translation, and so forth. Paraphrase pairs
might be coreferential, and coreference relations are sometimes paraphrases. The two
overlap considerably (Hirst 1981), but their deﬁnitions make them signiﬁcantly different
in essence: Paraphrasing concerns meaning, whereas coreference is about discourse
referents. Thus, they do not always coincide. In the following example,banddare both
coreferent and paraphrastic, whereasa,c,e,f,andhare coreferent but not paraphrastic,
andgandiare paraphrastic but not coreferent.
(1) [Tony]
a
went to see [the ophthalmologist]
b
and got [his]
c
eyes checked. [The eye
doctor]
d
told [him]
e
that [his]
f
[cataracts]
g
were getting worse. [His]
h
mother also
suffered from [cloudy vision]
i
.
The discourse model built for Example (1) contains six entities (i.e., Tony, the eye doctor,
Tony’s eyes, Tony’s cataracts, Tony’s mother, cataracts). Becausea,c,e,f,andhall point
to Tony, we say that they are coreferent. In contrast, in paraphrasing, we do not need to
build a discourse entity to state thatgandiare paraphrase pairs; we restrict ourselves to
semantic content and this is why we check for sameness of meaning between cataracts
and cloudyvision alone, regardless of whether they are a referential unit in a discourse.
Despite the differences, it is possible for paraphrasing and coreference to co-occur, as in
the case ofbandd.
NLP components dealing with paraphrasing and coreference seem to have great
potential to improve understanding and generation systems. As a result, they have been
the focus of a large amount of work in the past couple of decades (see the surveys by
∗ CLiC, Department of Linguistics, Gran Via 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: mrecasens@ub.edu.
∗∗ CLiC, Department of Linguistics, Gran Via 585, 08007 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: marta.vila@ub.edu.
1 Recognition, extraction, and generation are all paraphrase-related tasks. We will center ourselves on
paraphrase extraction, as this is the task in which paraphrase and coreference resolution mainly overlap.
Submission received: 3 March 2010; accepted for publication: 1 June 2010.
© 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
Androutsopoulos and Malakasiotis [2010], Madnani and Dorr [2010], Ng [2010], and
Poesio and Versley [2009]). Before computational linguistics, coreference had not been
studied on its own from a purely linguistic perspective but was indirectly mentioned in
the study of pronouns. Although there have been some linguistic works that consider
paraphrasing, they do not fully respond to the needs of paraphrasing from a computa-
tional perspective.
This article discusses the similarities between paraphrase and coreference in order
to point out the distinguishing factors that make paraphrase extraction and coref-
erence resolution two separate yet related tasks. This is illustrated with examples
extracted/adapted from different sources (Dras 1999; Doddington et al. 2004; Dolan,
Brockett, and Quirk 2005; Recasens and Mart´ı 2010; Vila et al. 2010) and our own. Apart
from providing a better understanding of these tasks, we point out ways in which they
can mutually beneﬁt, which can shed light on future research.
2.ConvergingandDivergingPoints
This section explores the overlapping relationship between paraphrase and coreference,
highlighting the most relevant aspects that they have in common as well as those that
distinguish them. They are both sameness relations (Section 2.2), but one is between
meanings and the other between referents (Section 2.1). In terms of linguistic units,
coreference is mainly restricted to noun phrases (NPs), whereas paraphrasing goes
beyond and includes word-, phraseand sentence-level expressions (Section 2.3). One
ﬁnal diverging point is the role they (might) play in discourse (Section 2.4).
2.1MeaningandReference
The two dimensions that are the focus of paraphrasing and coreference are meaning
and reference, respectively. Traditionally, paraphrase is deﬁned as the relation between
two expressions that have the samemeaning(i.e., they evoke the same mental concept),
whereas coreference is deﬁned as the relation between two expressions that have the
same referent in the discourse (i.e., they point to the same entity). We follow Karttunen
(1976) and talk of “discourse referents” instead of “real-world referents.”
In Table 1, the italicized pairs in cells (1,1) and (2,1) are both paraphrastic but
they only corefer in (1,1). We cannot decide on (non-)coreference in (2,1) as we need a
discourse to ﬁrst assign a referent. In contrast, we can make paraphrasing judgments
Table1
Paraphrase–coreference matrix.
Paraphrase
AY B1
Coreference
AY
(1,1)
Tony went to seethe
ophthalmologistand got his
eyes checked.Theeyedoctor
told him ...
(1,2)
Tony went to see the
ophthalmologist and got
hiseyes checked.
B1
(2,1)
ophthalmologist
eyedoctor
(2,2)
Hiscataractswere getting
worse.Hismotheralso
suffered from cloudy vision.
640
Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference
without taking discourse into consideration. Pairs like the one in cell (1,2) are only
coreferent but not paraphrases because the proper nounTonyand the pronounhishave
reference but no meaning. Lastly, neither phenomenon is observed in cell (2,2).
2.2Sameness
Paraphrasing and coreference are usually deﬁned as sameness relations: Two expres-
sions that have the samemeaning are paraphrastic, and two expressions that refer to
the sameentity in a discourse are coreferent. The concept of sameness is usually taken
for granted and left unexplained, but establishing sameness is not straightforward.
A strict interpretation of the concept makes sameness relations only possible in logic
and mathematics, whereas a sloppy interpretation makes the deﬁnition too vague. In
paraphrasing, if the loss ofatthecityin Example (2b) is not considered to be relevant, Ex-
amples (2a) and (2b) are paraphrases; but if it is considered to be relevant, then they are
not. It depends on where we draw the boundaries of what is accepted as the “same”
meaning.
(2) a. The waterlogged conditions that ruled out play yesterday still prevailed at
thecitythis morning.
b. The waterlogged conditions that ruled out play yesterday still prevailed this
morning.
(3) On homecoming night Postville feels like Hometown, USA ...For those who
prefertheoldPostville, Mayor John Hyman has a simple answer.
Similarly, with respect to coreference (3), whether Postville and theoldPostville in Ex-
ample 3 are or are not the same entity depends on the granularity of the discourse.
On a sloppy reading, one can assume that because Postville refers to the same spatial
coordinates, it is the same town. On a strict reading, in contrast, drawing a distinction
between the town as it was at two different moments in time results in two different
entities: the old Postville versus the present-day Postville. They are not the same in that
features have changed from the former to the latter.
The concept of sameness in paraphrasing has been questioned on many occasions.
If we understood “same meaning” in the strictest sense, a large number of paraphrases
would be ruled out. Thus, some authors argue for a looser deﬁnition of paraphrasing.
Bhagat (2009), for instance, talks about “quasi-paraphrases” as “sentences or phrases
that convey approximately the same meaning.” Mili´cevi´c (2007) draws a distinction
between “exact” and “approximate” paraphrases. Finally, Fuchs (1994) prefers to use
the notion of “equivalence” to “identity” on the grounds that the former allows for the
existence of some semantic differences between the paraphrase pairs. The concept of
identity in coreference, however, has hardly been questioned, as prototypical examples
appear to be straightforward (e.g.,BarackObamaandObamaandhe). Only recently have
Recasens, Hovy, and Mart´ı (2010) pointed out the need for talking about “near-identity”
relations in order to account for cases such as Example (3), proposing a typology of such
relations.
2.3LinguisticUnits
Another axis of comparison between paraphrase and coreference concerns the types
of linguistic units involved in each relation. Paraphrase can hold between different
641
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
linguistic units, from morphemes to full texts, although the most attention has been paid
to word-level paraphrase (kid and child in Example (4)), phrase-level paraphrase (cried
and burstintotears in Example (4)), and sentence-level paraphrase (the two sentences
in Example (4)).
(4) a. The kid cried.
b. The child burst into tears.
In contrast, coreference is more restricted in that the majority of relations occur at the
phrasal level, especially between NPs. This explains why this has been the largest focus
so far, although prepositional and adverbial phrases are also possible yet less frequent,
as well as clauses or sentences. Coreference relations occur indistinctively between
pronouns, proper nouns, and full NPs that are referential, namely, that have discourse
referents. For this reason, pleonastic pronouns, nominal predicates, and appositives
cannot enter into coreference relations. The ﬁrst do not refer to any entity but are
syntactically required; the last two express properties of an entity rather than introduce
a new one. But this is an issue ignored by the corpora annotated for the MUC and ACE
programs (Hirschman and Chinchor 1997; Doddington et al. 2004), hence the criticism
by van Deemter and Kibble (2000).
In the case of paraphrasing, it is linguistic expressions that lack meaning (i.e.,
pronouns and proper nouns) that should not be treated as members of a paraphrase pair
on their own (Example (5a)) because paraphrase is only possible between meaningful
units. This issue, however, takes on another dimension when seen at the sentence level.
The sentences in Example (5b) can be said to be paraphrases because they themselves
contain the antecedent of the pronounsIandhe.
(5) a. (i) A. Jim´enez
(ii) I
b. (i) The Atl´etico de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jim´enez, yesterday realized one
of his dreams by defeating Barcelona: “Ihad never beaten Barcelona.”
(ii) The Atl´etico de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jim´enez, yesterday realized one
of his dreams by defeating Barcelona, and said that he had never beaten
Barcelona.
In Example (5b), A.Jim´enez and I/he continue not being paraphrastic. Polysemic, un-
derspeciﬁed, and metaphoric words show a slightly different behavior. It is not possible
to establish paraphrase between them when they are deprived of context (Callison-
Burch 2007, Chapter 4). In Example (6a), policeofﬁcers could be patrol police ofﬁcers,
andinvestigatorscould be university researchers. However, once they are embedded in a
disambiguating context that ﬁlls them semantically, as in Example (6b), then paraphrase
can be established betweenpoliceofﬁcersandinvestigators.
(6) a. (i) Police ofﬁcers
(ii) Investigators
b. (i) Policeofﬁcerssearched 11 stores in Barcelona.
(ii) Theinvestigatorsconducted numerous interviews with the victim.
As a ﬁnal remark, and in accordance with the approach by Fuchs (1994), we consider
Example (7)–like paraphrases that Fujita (2005) and Mili´cevi´c (2007) call, respectively,
642
Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference
“referential” and “cognitive” to be best treated as coreference rather than paraphrase,
because they only rely on referential identity in a discourse.
(7) a. They got marriedlastyear.
b. They got marriedin2004.
2.4DiscourseFunction
A further difference between paraphrasing and coreference concerns their degree of de-
pendency on discourse. Given that coreference establishes sameness relations between
the entities that populate a discourse (i.e., discourse referents), it is a linguistic phe-
nomenon whose dependency on discourse is much stronger than paraphrasing. Thus,
the latter can be approached from a discursive or a non-discursive perspective, which
in turn allows for a distinction between reformulative paraphrasing (Example (8)) and
non-reformulative paraphrasing (Example (9)).
(8) Speaker 1: Then they also diagnosedahemolytic–uremicsyndrome.
Speaker 2: What’s that?
Speaker 1:Renalinsufﬁciency,inthekidneys.
(9) a. X wrote Y.
b. X is the author of Y.
Reformulative paraphrasing occurs in a reformulation context when a rewording of
a previously expressed content is added for discursive reasons, such as emphasis,
correction, or clariﬁcation. Non-reformulative paraphrasing does not consider the
role that paraphrasing plays in discourse. Reformulative paraphrase pairs have to be
extracted from a single piece of discourse; non-reformulative paraphrase pairs can
be extracted—each member of the pair on its own—from different discourse pieces. The
reformulation in the third utterance in Example (8) gives an explanation in a language
less technical than that in the ﬁrst utterance; whereas Examples (9a) and (9b) are simply
two alternative ways of expressing an authorship relation.
The strong discourse dependency of coreference explains the major role it plays
in terms of cohesion. Being such a cohesive device, it follows that intra-document
coreference, which takes place within a single discourse unit (or across a collection of
documents linked by topic), is the most primary. Cross-document coreference, on the
other hand, constitutes a task on its own in NLP but falls beyond the scope of linguistic
coreference due to the lack of a common universe of discourse. The assumption behind
cross-document coreference is that there is an underlying global discourse that enables
various documents to be treated as a single macro-document.
Despite the differences, the discourse function of reformulative paraphrasing brings
it close to coreference in the sense that they both contribute to the cohesion and devel-
opment of discourse.
3.MutualBeneﬁts
Both paraphrase extraction and coreference resolution are complex tasks far from being
solved at present, and we believe that there could be improvements in performance
643
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
if researchers on each side paid attention to the others. The similarities (i.e., relations
of sameness, relations between NPs) allow for mutual collaboration, whereas the differ-
ences (i.e., focus on either meaning or reference) allow for resorting to either paraphrase
or coreference to solve the other. In general, the greatest beneﬁts come for cases in which
either paraphrase or coreference are especially difﬁcult to detect automatically. More
speciﬁcally, we see direct mutual beneﬁts when both phenomena occur either in the
same expression or in neighboring expressions.
For pairs of linguistic expressions that show both relations, we can hypothesize
paraphrasing relationships between NPs for which coreference is easier to detect. For
instance, coreference between the two NPs in Example (10) is very likely given that they
have the same head, head match being one of the most successful features in coreference
resolution (Haghighi and Klein 2009). In contrast, deciding on paraphrase would be
hard due to the difﬁculty of matching the modiﬁers of the two NPs.
(10) a. The director of a multinational with huge proﬁts.
b. The director of a solvent company with headquarters in many countries.
In the opposite direction, we can hypothesize coreference links between NPs for which
paraphrasing can be recognized with considerable ease (Example (11)). Light elements
(e.g., fact), for instance, are normally taken into account in paraphrasing—but not in
coreference resolution—as their addition or deletion does not involve a signiﬁcant
change in meaning.
(11) a. The creation of a company.
b. The fact of creating a company.
By neighboring expressions, we mean two parallel structures each containing a coref-
erent mention of the same entity next to a member of the same paraphrase pair. Note
that the coreferent expressions in the following examples are printed in italics and the
paraphrase units are printed in bold. If a resolution module identiﬁes the coreferent
pairs in Example (12), then these can function as two anchor points,XandY, to infer that
the text between them is paraphrastic: XcomplainedtodaybeforeY,andXisformulating
thecorrespondingcomplainttoY.
(12) a. Argentina
X
complained today before the British Government
Y
about the
violation of the air space of this South American country.
b. This Chancellorship
X
isformulatingthecorrespondingcomplaintto the
BritishGovernment
Y
for this violation of the Argentinian air space.
Some authors have already used coreference resolution in their paraphrasing systems
in a similar way to the examples herein. Shinyama and Sekine (2003) beneﬁt from the
fact that a single event can be reported in more than one newspaper article in different
ways, keeping certain kinds of NPs such as names, dates, and numbers unchanged.
Thus, these can behave as anchor points for paraphrase extraction. Their system uses
coreference resolution to ﬁnd anchors which refer to the same entity.
Conversely, knowing that a stretch of text next to an NP paraphrases another stretch
of text next to another NP helps to identify a coreference link between the two NPs,
as shown by Example (13), where two diction verbs are easily detected as a para-
phrase and thus their subjects can be hypothesized to corefer. If the paraphrase system
644
Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference
identiﬁes the mapping between the indirect speech in Example (13a) and the direct
speech in Example (13b), the coreference relation between the subjects is corroborated.
Another difﬁcult coreference link that can be detected with the help of paraphrasing
is Example (14): If the predicates are recognized as paraphrases, then the subjects are
likely to corefer.
(13) a. ThetraineroftheCubanathleteSotomayorsaidthat the world record holder
is in a ﬁt state to win the Games in Sydney.
b. “The record holder is in a ﬁt state to win the Olympic Games,”explained
DelaTorre.
(14) a. Policeofﬁcerssearched11storesinBarcelona.
b. The investigators carried out 11 searches in stores in the center of
Barcelona.
Taking this idea one step further, new coreference resolution strategies can be developed
with the aid of shallow paraphrasing techniques. A two-step process for coreference
resolution might consist of hypothesizing ﬁrst sentence-level paraphrases via n-gram
or named-entity overlapping, aligning phrases that are (possible) paraphrases, and
hypothesizing that they corefer. Second, a coreference module can act as a ﬁlter and
provide a second classiﬁcation. Such a procedure could be successful for the cases
exempliﬁed in Examples (12) to (14).
This strategy reverses the tacit assumption that coreference is solved before
sentence-level paraphrasing. Meaning alone does not make it possible to state that the
two pairs in Example (5b), repeated in Example (15), or the two pairs in Example (16)
are paraphrases without ﬁrst solving the coreference relations.
(15) a. TheAtl´eticodeMadridgoalkeeper,A.Jim´enez, yesterday realized one of his
dreams by defeating Barcelona: “Ihad never beaten Barcelona.”
b. The Atl´etico de Madrid goalkeeper, A. Jim´enez, yesterday realized one of
his dreams by defeating Barcelona, and said that he had never beaten
Barcelona.
(16) a. Secretary of State Colin Powell last week ruled outanon-aggressiontreaty.
b. But Secretary of State Colin Powell brushed offthispossibility.
However, cooperative work between paraphrasing and coreference is not always pos-
sible, and it is harder if neither of the two can be detected by means of widely used
strategies. In other cases, cooperation can even be misleading. In Example (17), the two
bold phrases are paraphrases, but their subjects do not corefer. The detection of words
likeanother(Example (17b)) gives a key to help to prevent this kind of error.
(17) a. A total of 26 Cuban citizens remain in the police station of the airport of
Barajasafterrequestingpoliticalasylum.
b. Another three Cubansrequestedpoliticalasylum.
On the basis of these various examples, we claim that a full understanding of both
the similarities and disparities will enable fruitful collaboration between researchers
working on paraphrasing and those working on coreference. Even more importantly,
645
Computational Linguistics Volume 36, Number 4
our main claim is that such an understanding about the fundamental linguistic issues is
a prerequisite for building paraphrase and coreference systems not lacking in linguistic
rigor. In brief, we call for the return of linguistics to paraphrasing and coreference
automatic applications, as well as to NLP in general, adhering to the call by Wintner
(2009: 643), who cites examples that demonstrate “what computational linguistics can
achieve when it is backed up and informed by linguistic theory” (page 643).
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Eduard Hovy, M. Ant`onia
Mart´ı, Horacio Rodr´ıguez, and Mariona
Taul´e for their helpful advice as experienced
researchers. We would also like to express
our gratitude to the three anonymous
reviewers for their suggestions to improve
this article.
This work was partly supported by FPU
Grants AP2006-00994 and AP2008-02185
from the Spanish Ministry of Education,
and Project TEXT-MESS 2.0 (TIN2009-
13391-C04-04).
References
Androutsopoulos, Ion and Prodromos
Malakasiotis. 2010. A survey of
paraphrasing and textual entailment
methods.JournalofArtiﬁcialIntelligence
Research, 38:135–187.
Bhagat, Rahul. 2009.Learning
ParaphrasesfromText. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA.
Callison-Burch, Chris. 2007.Paraphrasingand
Translation. Ph.D. thesis, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh.
Doddington, George, Alexis Mitchell, Mark
Przybocki, Lance Ramshaw, Stephanie
Strassel, and Ralph Weischedel. 2004.
The Automatic Content Extraction (ACE)
program—Tasks, data, and evaluation.
InProceedingsofthe4thInternational
ConferenceonLanguageResourcesand
Evaluation(LREC2004), pages 837–840,
Lisbon.
Dolan, Bill, Chris Brockett, and Chris Quirk.
2005. README ﬁle included in the
Microsoft Research Paraphrase Corpus,
March, Redmond, WA.
Dras, Mark. 1999.TreeAdjoiningGrammar
andtheReluctantParaphrasingofText.Ph.D.
thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney.
Fuchs, Catherine. 1994.Paraphraseet
´enonciation.Mod´elisationdelaparaphrase
langagi`ere. Ophrys, Paris.
Fujita, Atsushi. 2005.AutomaticGenerationof
SyntacticallyWell-formedandSemantically
AppropriateParaphrases. Ph.D. thesis, Nara
Institute of Science and Technology,
Ikoma, Nara.
Haghighi, Aria and Dan Klein. 2009.
Simple coreference resolution with rich
syntactic and semantic features. In
ProceedingsoftheConferenceonEmpirical
MethodsinNaturalLanguageProcessing
(EMNLP2009), pages 1152–1161,
Singapore.
Hirschman, Lynette and Nancy Chinchor.
1997. MUC-7 Coreference task deﬁnition–
Version 3.0. InProceedingsoftheMessage
UnderstandingConference-7(MUC-7),
Washington, DC.
Hirst, Graeme J. 1981.AnaphorainNatural
LanguageUnderstanding:ASurvey.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Karttunen, Lauri. 1976. Discourse referents.
In J. McCawley, editor,Syntaxand
Semantics,volume7.AcademicPress,
New York, pages 363–385.
Madnani, Nitin and Bonnie J. Dorr. 2010.
Generating phrasal and sentential
paraphrases: A survey of data-driven
methods.ComputationalLinguistics, 36,
pages 341–387.
Mili´cevi´c, Jasmina. 2007.Laparaphrase.
Peter Lang, Berne.
Ng, Vincent. 2010. Supervised noun phrase
coreference research: The ﬁrst ﬁfteen
years. InProceedingsofthe48thMeeting
oftheAssociationforComputational
Linguistics(ACL2010), Uppsala,
pages 1396–1411.
Poesio, Massimo and Yannick Versley. 2009.
Computational models for the
interpretation of anaphora: A survey.
Notes from the ACL-2009 Tutorial on
State-of-the-art NLP Approaches to
Coreference Resolution, Singapore.
Recasens, Marta, Eduard Hovy, and
M. Ant`onia Mart´ı. 2010. A typology of
near-identity relations for coreference
(NIDENT). InProceedingsofthe7th
InternationalConferenceonLanguage
ResourcesandEvaluation(LREC2010),
pages 149–156, Valletta.
Recasens, Marta and M. Ant`onia Mart´ı. 2010.
AnCora-CO: Coreferentially annotated
646
Recasens and Vila On Paraphrase and Coreference
corpora for Spanish and Catalan.Language
ResourcesandEvaluation, 44(4):315–345.
doi: 10.1007/s10579-009-9108-x.
Shinyama, Yusuke and Satoshi Sekine.
2003. Paraphrase acquisition for
information extraction. InProceedingsof
theACL2ndInternationalWorkshopon
Paraphrasing(IWP2003), pages 65–71,
Sapporo.
van Deemter, Kees and Rodger Kibble. 2000.
On coreferring: Coreference in MUC and
related annotation schemes.Computational
Linguistics, 26(4):629–637.
Vila, Marta, Santiago Gonz´alez, M. Ant`onia
Mart´ı, Joaquim Llisterri, and M. Jes´us
Machuca. 2010. ClInt: A bilingual
Spanish-Catalan spoken corpus of
clinical interviews.Procesamientodel
LenguajeNatural, 45, 105–111.
Wintner, Shuly. 2009. What science
underlies Natural Language Engineering?
ComputationalLinguistics, 35(4):641–644.
647


