American Journal of Computational Linguistics Mi crof i C~Q 2 7 A FORMAL PSYCHOLINGUISTIC MODEL OF SENTENCE COMPREHENSION PETER REIMOLD Copyri ht @ 1975 Association for Computational Linguistics This paper outlines a psychologically constrained theory of sentence comprehension The most prominent features of the theory are that: (1) syntactic structure is discarded clause by clause (where the traditional notion of clause is modified in certain respects so as to conform to short term memory requirements); (2) the syntactic and semantic processor work in parallel.
The semantic analysis proceeds from the preliminary semantic representation (PSR) via the intermediate SR (ISR) to the final SR (FSR), making crucial use OX an encyclopedia which codes semantic knowledge.
The three stages of the semantic analysis are discussed.
Concatenation Rules establish the PSR, Meaning Rules and Encyclopedic Rules the ISR, and Semantic Linking Strategies the FSR.
At every stage, the semantic representations are in terms of a modified predicate ca~culus notation.
Syntax-free as well as syntax-sensitive Linking Strategies are presented for clause-internal linking.
Finally, syntax-free linking of constituent clauses of complex sentences is described.
TABLE OF CONTENTS I l SOW3 PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS ON SENTENCE COMPRXHENSTQN MODZLS a...amommamo*.amoe.oemaoaoamom 4 11.
TRADITIONAL LINGUISTIC APPROACHES rmmm.aamoammmamem 11 LII l A THREE-STAGE THEOXY OF SENANTIC ANALYSIS l l l a a. a l 13 IV A BIODIFIEB PREDICATE CALCULUS NOTATION FOR SSdANTIC REPRESENTATIONS mm.m.maeeo.ameoaoom...mamm 15 Vm THE PSRB CONCATENATION RULES .o~m.**eaoaaeme*.mmomm 17 VI.
THE ISR: SEMANTIC KNOWLEDGE RULES aoemmaaoaoeme*aoa 19 VTI THE -FSR t SEMANTIC LINKING STRATEGIES l l l 6 l a l l l a 3 22 VIIIe DIFFERENT MODES OF PROCESSING a a l a l a moo l a em or l a l rn ma 30 IXo "ALTERNATIVE LINKING STRATEGIES'' ..aaoaaoaaao~mamma 33 Xm CLAUSE-TOWCLAUSE LINKING mm*aoao*o+mom.m--*---*--..
35 XI THE "TIDIPORAL SEQUENCE STRAT=YW l I, . l l l a a l l a l a a . 38 4 I . SOME PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS ON SENTENCE COMPREHENSION MODELS In this paper I consider the question of how an automatic sentence recognizer would have to look in order to be compatible wLth present psycholinguistic knowledge about speech comprehmh The basic premise is that psycholinguistic considerations are of potential interest to computational theories (see, e.g., ~chank(1972) ) Let me begin by summarizing some characteristics of speeck processing which we know either from experiments, or which are intuitively clear.
First, there is some evidence that the clause is a unit of processing.
For instance, ~aplan(1972) showed that after a clause boundary is passed, the cons-bitaent words bf the completed clause are relatively inaccesai'ble, as measured by wmd recognition latency.
The effect was independent of the serial position of the word for which recognition time was tested.
This suggests that sentences are processed clause by clause, with only the semantic content regularly retained after the clause boundary is passed.
The surface words (and g fortiori the syntactic structure) of the clause would tend to be erased after each clause boundary.
1 *Thie paper is based on chapter VII of my doctoral dissertation (~eimold (forthcoming) ) . I wish to thank Thomas G . Bever, Jame-a Higginbotham, and D *Terence Langendoen for helpful suggestions.
l~he fortioriJ refers to the fact that the syntactic structure Another study supporting the clause as unit of proceasing is Abrams 6 ~ever(1969).
These authors found that reaction time to short bursts of noise "clicks") superimposed on sentences was longer for clause-final clicks than for clause-initial ones.
This would point to the clause as unit of perception, under the assumption that processing is more intensive towards the end of a perce~tual unit, and that reaction time to external stimuli is a valid ineicator of the intensity of internal procesging.
or a review of other studies in support of the clausal processing theory, the reader is referred to Podor, Bever & ~arre%t(1974), where arguments are also given for the clause as a decision point across which ambiguitiis are,normally at least, not carried-.
) Secondly, it seems that as we listen to speech, we simultaneously have access to both the syntactic and semantic propertiee of what we hear.
That is, there appears to be ~arallel orocessing of the syntax and the semantics of a clause.
One finding explained by this assumption is that so-called "irreversible" passive sentences like (1) are perceptually no more complex thnn their active counterparts (the air1 ~icked the rlower,in this case).
By contrast, 'reversiblew passives like (2) take longer to verify vis-a-vis pictures than the ~orre~pondin$ active sentences (~lobin(1.966) ) . presumably contain8 surface wards as terminal nodes.
Hence if the eyntax were regularly preserved the surface words should remain easily accessible, too.
(1) The flowe~ was picked by the girl.
(irreversible) (2) The boy was kicked by the girl.
(reversible) It appears that the syntactic complexity introduced by the passive construction is somehow circumvented by a predominantly semantic method of analysis in the case of i&reversible passives m2 We thus get a picture of speech processing as in ~i~~l.3 yntactic pr-l $ syntactic structure of .S 1 input I' [string SI semantic ~rza-----d semantic structure of s 1 Fig.1: Parallel Processing Model 2~nother experimental study su parting the Parallel.
Processing theory is larslen-lilson(l973 '!
. 3~y view of the role of syntax is related to that expressed in ~chank(1972), who believes that the function of syntax is ""as a pointer to semantic information rather than as a first step to aemantic analysis'?
(~~555) Similarly, winograd (1971) allows parallel operation of syntactic and semantic analysis.
However, me syntactic and semantic processor in Winograd's systehr have full power, in minciple, to question each other about their respective success before proceeding with their part pf the analysis* This powerful device has been aeverely restricted in the theory described here (for details, see Reimold (f orthc oming) ) The main reasons for thie are the greater reliance, in my theory, on "syntax-free" semantic interpretation, and the generally shorter life-apan of syntactic structure (see the discussion of "peripheral clauses" below).
Woods (1973) also discussee a system with certain facilities for parallel processing, for instance, the "Selnctlve Modifier Placement" facility (sMP)~ The function of SMP is to ~elsct from the list of syn%actically adrnissibLe alternatives the one which is semantically most appropriate, and return only that alternative to the parser before golng an *o analyze the rest of the sentence.
The most important difference between Woods' proposal and the one presented here is that his semantic processor only chooaes among tact tructQrsd alternatives (and, in that sense,% a fu%$%$tax-sensltve method), whereas my theory partdates rn gyntactfclm men wh modifiers and their heads.
Let me return now to the principle of clause-by-clause processing, If we assume that "imqediate processing" takes place in short term memory, then we must automatically requkre that the unit of processing must not exceed the known Limits of short term memory.
Now since that limit is generally taken to be about 5 wordsp the clause-by-clause principle cannot be literally true.
For instance.
(3) lists some "clauses" longer than 5 words.
It seems to me, therefore, that we have to revise the traditional concept of olause* (3)a) John and Bill and Otto stroked and huaaed the goat am the goose.
b) The man with the dog with the c~llar,with the bell Laughed, c) John met his friends yelafzerdau morning around ten o'clock ih .a liCtle cafe near DL-U~UW~Y.
Z propose to take the underlined phrases in (3) out of the sentence proper and process them as if they were separate clauses.
That is, f draw a distinction between the "nucLearH clause and "peripheralw clauses.
The non-underlined 'portions in (3) are nuclear clauses.
Peripheral clauses include: Prep-clauses ("with the collar"), Comparison-clauses ("than the old colonelw).
Post-clauses ("yesterday, 'I "around ten otclo~ 'in a little cafe"), and Coordinate-clauses ("and Bill," "and hugged") This treatment of certain phrases as peripheral clauses seems plausible too, if we consider that "adnominal" Prepphrases, for instance, are semantically like relative clauses, as shown in (4), and that adverbs are parallel to certain "adverbialU clauses, as indicated in (5).
(4)~qirl { with a green hat who wore a green hat greeted John.
5) John ate the cake C afterwards . aster the guests left.
Zvldently, witha green hat in (4) is related to who wore a meen hat, and the adverb afterwards in (5) can be replaced by fill1 adverbial clauses like after the m1es.t~ left.
We are presently testing the validity of this notion of peripheral clause.
e use snntence pairs like (6a-b) I (6a) The officer threatened to give the woman * a +icket.b&einternal position of click "*") (6b) The officer threatened to fine the woman * without B a license.
(clavse-final position of click "*") Y Our goal is to determine, mine a 'click detection paradien, whether or not there is a "clause boundary effect" before the final peripheral clause witho7l-t a License in (6b) * Notice that according to my hypothesis, there is a clause boundary after woman in (6b), but not in (6a) . It has been shown in n humber of studies that clause boundaries (but not phra~e boundaries, in general) have certain measurable behavioral effectn Crf.
the review in Focbr, Bever L ~arrett(l974))t so this should apply here too, ff peripheral clauses are indeed psychologically reab clauses 'Now, the last principle-I want to discass is that in understanding an utterance, people mage creative use of their knowledge -about the warId.
4 For
instance, if I only hear you say* (7,) The cat just caught a -I can immediately guess that the last word was something like bird or DDUW SimlLar-ly, if you say: (8) Put the freezer in the turkey.
I know that you really meant "put the turkey in the freezer," 4 This general point has been made, in one fortn pr another, by many authors.
For instance, Winograd~1971) notes that correct understanding of they in *The city councilmen refused to give the women a permit for a demonstration because 3;he-y.
feared violezkmm and "The ckky coundlmen refused to give the women a permit for a denaonst6ation because they advocated revalution" needs the "information and reasoning power to realize that city councf lmen are usually staunch advocates of law and order, btlt are hardly likely to be revolutionaries."(p~ll) Similarly, ~chank(19-72) envisages a theory of natural language underetanding whlch."has a conceptual base that coneiate of a formal etructurew and "can make predictfons on the basis of this conceptual structurew(,556) The principal differences between these approaches and m f ne have to do with (1) the of the stored semantic information (PLANNER and "conceptual case networkn representations vsc predicate calculus representations) and (2) the proposed ~ccem ~chan5s~ to thia infobmation.
Schank's theory relies on lexLcal decornpoeLtion, while I uae the "meaning postulates" methodr Winograd opts for a broad procedural approach, representing "knowledge in the form of praceuuree rather than tables of rules or lists of pattern~~"(p.21) By contrast, my proposal remaine closer to the traditional WdeclarativeH approach, as will become clear because J.
Know someznlng aDout turkeys and freezers.
No model excluding the possibility af matching speech against stored knowledge of the world can explain such facts.
In this connection, consider also the sentences in (911 (9a) I'm leaving the dbor open so I won't forget to wina &=p (it= the clock-there was no previous mention of a clock in the dialogue, but the speaker was looking at a Grandfather clock with open door) (9b) They published Wodehouse immediately he came over.
(= published books written by Wodehouse) (9c) Italy was sitting in the first row, and France in the second.
(= peo~le from Italy and France) (9d) We'd better put in 20 minutes.
(= money for 20 minutes -speaking about a parking meter) (9e) He's sitting bv his olate that isn't there.(= by where he wishes* his plate were, by his late in his wish-world epeaking of a cat) These sentences can a11 be understood without difficultyr and the way we understand them is by using our general semantic knowledge.
What this means, then, is that the comprehension model needs to incorporate an encyclopedia which somehow codes semantic knowledge.
In slm, to be compatible with the psychological model, the al~tomatic sentence recognizer should have the following properties 8 (1) it should be a clause-by-clause processo2, where my notion of "-lause" includes some things traditionally regarded as phrases; as soon as the interpretation of a clause is completed, its syntactic structure is erased; (2) there should be parallel syntactic and semantic processing of each clause1 (3) the recognizer must make systematic use of an encyclopedia which codes knowledge about the world* IIt TZADITIONAL LINGUISTIC APPROACHES Putting together the above observations, one can already see that current linguistic theories are not very helpful for the eolution of our problem.
Fnr inetance, linguistic theory would claim that sentence (10) has the syntactic structwe in (11)~ which then undergoes various syntactic transformations until it is finally mapped onto its appropriate semantic s true ture . The rrentence recognizers moat directly meetfng this descriptior are robabl those developed by Stanley Petrick (see Petrick (~969, 197)y) . Wlth some modlf icatione, however, this deecription also fits the theories preeerited in Winograd (1971) and Woode (1973).
Whkle these syetema are feature-manipulating rather than transformational, they nonetheless assume that the life-span of syntax extends over an entire sentence, and they make crucial use of integrated syntactic structures for corn lax sentences or instan~e, winograd (1971) presents an f ntegrated syntactic structure for the sentence "Pick up anything green, at least three of the blocker and either a box or a sphere which is bigger than any brick on the table.
Recagnlzere ueing an inverse "Geherative Se'lllantics" grammar would aldo fall under this deecriptioh.
(10) The man with the beard claimed fiercely that he was innocent.
fiercely that h~ ent But in the vLew I have just sketched, sentence (10) never has any integrated syntactic structure like (11).
Instead, as shown in (121, the string with the beard, for instance, is processed as a separate clause, and as soon as.
its meaning has been extracted and added as qualifier to the preceding noun phrase the man, its syntactic structure is erased.
(12) 4 successive "perceptual crrruses" for sentence (10)r [claimed MVB] Lq ma< Similarly, the "Post+ Lause" fiercely and the entire complement clause that he was innocent must be linked to the main clause without referring to the syntactic struc~ure of the latter, which is assumed to be erased as soon as the word claimed has been semantically integrate& This would seem to be a more economical procedure, because it minimizes the size of the syntactic ballast that has to be carried along.
C~mparsr for instance, the size of the chunk in (11) to the size 0.4 the little chunks in (12).
Secondly, transformational grammar is hardly compatible with the principle of parallel Processins of the eyntax and semantics of a @lausem The reason is that accdrding to transformational grammar, the syntactic analysis precedes and determines the semaqtic analysis.
By contrast, Parallel Processing means that at least some of the semantic interpretation rules must be syntax-free.
111 a A THREE-STAGE THEORY OF SEMANTIC ANALYSIS Lez US reT;urn Lor a moment to rlg.l.
That rlgure contained a box labelled gyn*actic pracew, and another box labelled semantic proceseoP.
As I have stated, these components cannot be identified with the eyntactic and semantic components of current transformational grammar . The syntactic processor will not be discussed in detail here (see ~eimold~forthcoming) for a fuller diacuesiori).
It is a predictive parser using d-ency * notation.
There are-no syptactic transformations at all, but the output is a simple surface tree for each clbause, with certain nodes marked by functional features like SuBJect, OBJ1, OBJ2, or MainVerB.
The trees m (-12) above are exarpples.
For the remainder, let me concentrate on the semantic box.
I suggest that there are three stapes in the semantic analysis.
as shown in FigS, namely a preliminary, intermediate, and f.inal semantic representatton (PSR, ISR, and FSR).
Preliminary SR f-$~~terrnediatew Final SR I c onc at enati on Meaning Rules & (Rules1 '-Encyclopedic Rules ' Fig.24 +Stage Model of Semantic Analysis The PSIi corresponds to a simple comblnatip~~ of the lexical meaninsrs of the words.
Clearly, as we hear the words in a sentence, we immediately grasp their indi4idual meaning, even though we may not be sure yet how they fit together.
Thi-s' then f s the preliminary SR.
But we als~ immediately have access to some of the immJ,ications of the words and phrases.
For instance, if I hear "catw I immediately also know wanlmal.w Adding such implications derives the intermediate SR from -the PSRe The final SR is lake the preliminary one, except that the appropriate semantic roleshave been assigned to all the conetLtuents.
An example for the three stages is given in (13).
(13) The boy laughed.
PSR r (THEX 1 BOYX) (By) (E t.: PAST t ) I: LAUGHY~ 3 ISRI (IIIEX~BOYX &HUMAN% & ~ADULTX m0*}(3~)(3 t~ PAST t & -FUTUaZ t * . ) C LAUGHyt & HUMANY & ANIKATEY~ & BLNFyt .a 2 (simolif ied to a (~Ibr BOYX) (E t t PAST t) C LAUGHxt 3 ) Before translatAmg the structures in (13) into English let me remark on the form of semantic representations.
33: A MODIFIED PREDICATE CALCULUS NOTATION $OR SmANTIC REPRESENTATIONS Bgch semantic representation consists of a number of mef iaeqand a matrix, where the prewf ixes oorrespona roughly to the noun phrased of the sentence, and the matrix to the main predicate.
For easier reference, I have marked this distinction in the text by always enclosing the matrix in square bracke%s * c f " . 6 For instance, in (13) there are three prefixes, and the matrix i& LAUGHVYI.
Each prefix consists of a quantifier (e.g., THE, g --which reade "there is at least onew-or ALL), followed by a variable g &,y,=,&,g --represented by lower case letters 6 The lfnear notatLon used throughout here is an abbreviation defined over dependency stru~tures . For details, see ~e~mol4 (forthcoming), where definitions are also given for tranelating them structures into standard predicate calculus.
in the examples), and optionally followed by a backmounded proposition.
Backgrounded propositions are the expressions to the rl&t of the colon within the prefixes.
For instance, the first prefix in (13) contains the quantifier THE, the variable &@ and a backgrounded pl?oposition BO'lhc, and the entire prefix is readt "The entity x such mat x is &.boy.
#I We can now translate the structures 111 (13) into English.
The first, Lee, the preliminary SIi, sayst "%e x such that x.
is a boy is invowed in somE vent suoh that there is some y and some time which is PAST, and .y is laughing at time t".
Notice that this only asserts that the boy is somehow,invo&%ed in this, but it does not specify just h.0~.
But in order to describe what the ligtener actually understand$ when hearing %he bov lauded, we must of course specify which role the boy plays in this event.
Now, looking at the final SH in (13).
it can be seen that it is like the PS3, except that it also contains a role pssiment (or $ink, as I will caL1 it), namely x=y:.
That is, 5, the boy, playe the role of y, who was the one who did the laughing.
By executing this equation x-Y, we can of course simplify the representation, which gives us the last line in (13) The intermediate SR in (13), furthermore, is like the preliminary SR, but in addition contains certain implications of the words.
Thus we have: "the x such that x is a boy and (by implication) human and not adult.
etc . * And in the matrix of the fSR we get "y laughs at time t and, by implication, y is hman and anima-te and alive-at-time-t.* In other words, one cann.ot laugh unless one is human and alive Vs THE PSR J CONCUENATION RULES Let us return wain to Fig.2.
It shows three different blocks of rules which are responsible for deriving the three stages of the semantic analysis, namely, Concatenation Rules, Meaning Rules and Encyclopedic Rules (collectively ~ef erred to as Semantic Knowledge ~ules), and finally Semantic Linking Strategies.
They will occupy ue fn this order The Concatenation Rules take the semantic definition of the most recent input word and add it to the current preliminary semantic structure.
For instance, (14) lists the semantic definitions (namely-for the, b6v.and laughed) which are relevant for the example in (13) above.
7~ have made the simplifying assumption that there are lowerlevel components providing the syntactic an& semantic components with a lexically analyzed input string* This, of course, is almost certainly incorrect, and should be refined by making the matching procaea partly top-downi(1n the case of the syntax this has been done to a certain extent, since it is.based on s predictive analyzer.
It has not yet been done for the eemantioel but it seems that it can be bui t into the present s stem relative1 easj.1 ).
See Nash-Webber 1974) for further P P t drscuseion.eepec ally h s description of the SPEECHLIS system.
(14) (a) rthe DDI a (THSV~ --) re-1 (b) ~~OST ~fl I (EX) EBOYXI (c) Elaurrhed MVB PAST], (~'y) (E tr PAST t) L LAUG~~~ 1 Notice that each of the deftnitions consists again of a prefix and a matrix.
There are two Concatenation Rules, namely Joining and Ba~kmoundinq~ They are sta-t;ed in abbreviated form in (15) and (~6).
and are illustrated in (17).
(15) Joir._?gc Let (x) tM1l be the current preliminary SR, and (Y) t M2 3 the semantic definition of the last input woPd (which may pot be art of an NP), where (x) and (Y) are the prefixes, and ml'J and tM23 the matrixes Then form (K)(Y) [ MI & M23 (16 ) Backeroundin~: Let {QTFV~ (x) (hll)) be the partial 9R for the current NP.
Then join the semantic definition (Y) [P121 of the last inp~~t word (if it is part of this NP) as in {PTR~:(x)(Y)( MI Rc M2 )I (17) Joinin& and packarwndinq applied to (13-14): Start r (THEVI --) t--3 Backgrounding: (THEV~~E x) LBOYx'] ) c--l Joining: (THEV-:(E x) ~BOYX])(E y)(~ t:PAST t)[~~ud~yt] I will not discuss this aspect of the theory in great detail here.
No+e only that the only syntactic information needed for Concatenhtion is whether or not the input is part of an YP.
Othexwiee the semantic definitions of the words ar8 added from left to rF&t, prefixes behind prefixes, and matrix be ind matrf x.
8 VIt
THE ISR I SWANTIC KNOWLEDGE RULES Going baqk to Pig.2, the next step was the intermediate SR, which is ilerived from the preliminaPy SR by applying Semantic Knowledge Rules.
namely Meaning Rules and Encyclopedic Rules.
Meaning Rules deal with strict implicatioli, while 3ncyclopedic Rules are typically probabilistic.
For instance, Keanfng 3ules tell us that if somebody is a baker he must also be human and hence animate and hence concrete, etc ; while Encyclopedic Rules tell us that he tends to wear white clothes, tends to sell bread to people, and similar facts.
9 f had stated earlier that speech involves using one's knowledge about the world.
There are two separate problems with this kind ~f semantic knowledge: (1) how to code it!
(2) how to retrieve it.
Coacerning the finst problem, I assume encyclopedic 8~n the present version of thd theory, the semantic processor accept6 the aemantic definition of a word only if that word has matched the syntactic predictions.
It is probably desirahls to liberalise this procedure so as to handle ungrammatical 86QU6n216BB r 9 The distinction between M-rule8 and E-rules is akin to Katz& ~odor'~-(1963) distinction between semantic markers and giktinauis~, the main difference being that Kate & Fodor information to be coded essentially in the same form as the semantic representations themselves.
This makes it easy to transfer to the encyclopedia informatior received in the cutrent dialogue.
Such "active" information would be added continuously to the "situational chapter" of the $ncyclopedia, where this chapter is thought of a3 containing The linguistic and non-linguistic context of the current utterance.
Concerning the retrieval problem, it is clear that the information in the encyclopedia must be extracted selectively.
The solution chosen here is the one characteristik ~f networks Each Knowledge Rule is given an address, and each lexical entry, as well as each Knowledga Rule, includes pointers to the address of some other relevant Knowledge Rules; Only tnose gules are called up which are associated with the sentence constituents through some pointer.
In the case of Meaning 2ules this restriction seems sufficient, because there are only few for each lexi-cal entry.
Not so in the case of Encyclopedic Rules.
For instance, thebe are all kinds of things I know about bakers --say, that they tend to wear white clothes for work--, but most of which are irrelevant for understanding and verifying the sentence1 (18) The bay was sold a nice cake by-the baker.
used features whereas I use meaning postulates@ For practical purposes, the most important aspect 'af the distinction is that M-rlxles are applied obligatorily, while E-rules are applied &electively, according to the intersection technique* (see the discussion below).
Fot: a discussion and critique of the ''featurelln approach, see Weinreich(l966).
For instance, the sentence is perfectly true even if the baker happened to be wearing a f lremanB s uniform while selling the cake to the boy.
A good way of restricting the number of Knowledge Rules called up for a given sentence seems the Intersection Strategy (cf.
~uillian(1969)) in (19) . (19) Intersection Stratemc If a clause contains two different constituents A and 3 both pointing to the same encJIclopedic rule E, then call Be This rule says to call up only those Encyclopedic iiules which are associated wkth a% least two constituents of the sentence.
For instance, in (20) 1 (20) This bread was eo'ld to John by the Italian baker.
baker. sell, and bread all point to the same encyclopedic "patternw (21), which states that bakers typically sell baked goods to people4 Hence, the Intersection Strategy Would call up this pattern, which could then be uaed to help interpret the sentence.
But the rule specifying that bakers typically wear white clothes for work would not be called up for sentence (20)~ because only the constituent baker in the sentence would point to this particular pattern.
VIIt TAE FSAr SmANTIC LINKING ST2ATEGIES Let me return once more to Fig.2.
The last~CIle-block in this figure was labelled Semantic Linking Strstegies.
They are responsible forrderiving the final Sii, by assigning the appropri&tte semantic roles to various parts of the clauim.
There are two aspects to this# clause-internal linking, and clause-to-clause linking.
I would like to discuss clauseinternal linking first.
It seems to me that when we listen to speech, we have a choice of how much attention we pay to syntactic details.
This is what Parallel Processing is all about, and it means that thsre are syntax-frse linking strztegies besides syntaxsensitive ones.
(22) &ves a synopsis of tba linking strategies.
(22) Semantfc Linking Strate~iees 1.
Linking by Variable Type 4.
Canonical Order Strategy 2.
Pattern Matching 5.
Syntax-sensitive 2ule 3 . Contradiction Zlimination 6.
"Alternative Linking" Types 1, 2, and 3 are syntax-fre8.
Type 4, the "Cxnanical Order" stratecy (cf.
~ever(1770)) relies on the shallowest aspect of syntax, namely simple linear order of the major clalrse consitllents.
Type 5 is nensi-f;ive to "functional" featllres occurring in the syntactic surface tree.
The 6th type, "Alternative Linking Strategies," will be explained later on; they, too, are pi~rely semantic, Lh-gugh they apply only after the syntax-sensitive rule8 have applied (and failed).
Nbw, within this system of linking strategies, there see3 to be different levels of detail.
At the shallowest level we have Linking by Variable Type.
Pattern icatching requires more semantic detail 1 and Contradfc~tion Elimination is sti 11 more thorough.
Furthermore, thp syntax-free strategies rnay be assumed to be simpler than the syntax-sensitive ones, because the latter must keep track of two separate structures namely the semantic and the syntactic structure.
I assume that the strategies are ordered according to their relative simplicity, which would give us the order as listed in (22) Furthermore, I assume that once an acceptable reading has been derived for a clause, application of further strategies in the hierarchy becomes o~tiont&.
This of course is subject to empirical tests.
For instance, Pattern Katching would interpret the sentence: (23) The baker was sold some stale bread by the butcher.
incorrectly as "the baker sold the butcher some stale bread.
'' If application of further strategies is indeed optional, such sentences should sometimee be misinterpreted.
There is in fact some intuitive support for suck a position I 'think most of u% have experienced situations where a Slip of the Yongue like put the freezer in the turkev passed unnoticed atfirst.
This ie moat naturally explained by assuming that the syntax never got a chance to apply to the sentence, due to the fact that Pattern Matching resulted in an acceptable reading.
Let me now discuss these Linking Strategies in more detail.
The first type was Linking by Variable Type, which is stated in (24).
(24) Linking by Variable Tne: (1) Link the head-variable of each SR-prefix to the INB-argument of the a~oronriate te provided there is only one eugn appropriate MVB-argument, and is not already linked to some other variahl A in the SR-matrix; (2) if Y is an Bvent-variable .I e then add e=X, where X is MVB plus its modifiers and arguments; (3) if n is a predicate variable then substitute for F MVB and its arguments.
L This rule says to link the "head-variable" (Lea, the left-moet variable) of each prefix to the PNB argument which matches its type.
Option (2) specifies that event-variables are linked to the event described by the main predicate1 and option (3) deals with certain adverbs like slbwlw or softlv.
The rule will be explained usine the example (25).
(25) (a) #Yesterday the fath5r of the boy sang + #horribly # in the bath 4.
(b) PSR: (THE~~:YSSTE&~~)[THEXI(TH~~:BOY~)(FATHERX~)J (E t2aPAST tZ) (E x*)(E P)(E e) (TIIEZ: BATH%) E~INc~~x~~~ & HORRIBLY()?
& INez 1 Looking at (25b), the PSR for sentence (25a), it can be seen that the variables in the prefixes are of several different ty~es; there are the time-variables 4 and t2, individual-variables IC, y, 2, etc ., a predicate-variable ', and an event-variable The main verb (M3) is SING, and its arguments are a and Kow, time-variables can only be linked to other tkxhe-variables, and these links have the specific form ~EYB ("time-of-tne-YXB is included in tirneof -the-prefix" ), in our cabe t~ c Cl.
Next there ie an individual-variable JC, which matches only the ma-argument hence the link is x=x,m Then there is the predicate-variable F which, according to option (3) of the strategy, is replaced by iWB plus its arguments, yielding the combined reading H-(SIN G%nally, the event-variable p $s linked to the entire event described by the main predicate, namely that x2 sari(: horribly at time t21 p=tlO8RIBLY (SINGX~~) This exgands the matrix of (25b) into (26), giving us, after simplification, the final 3R (27) for (25a).
The entire procedure is eyntax-free, with one qualificationt the constituent correepond1ng to the pain verb is marked in the semantic repreeentation by a oonresponding feature That is.
SING in (25b) is marked as WVlulVB This syntactic feature is immediately copied from the syntactic structure into the semantic one$ where it is preserved until the entire sentence has been processed.
For many constituent types, Linking by Variable Type is the only Linking Strategy that is needed.
This is true particl~larly for adverbs, temporal phrases like last Octbber, PrepP like into the garden, and auxiliary verbs like will.
In addition, if a, clause has only one nuclear noun phrase, as 2s the case in sentence (25a), then the entire interpretation fs normally taken care of by this strategy# The next strategy was Pattern M*tching, which is stated in (28).
It says that if certain clause constituents match a pattern, then they are linked as in the pattern.
(28) Pattern Matching: (1: Let (TIIPV~IA~V~)~..(TY~$~A~V~) Bvi...ve m 1 be a pattern called up by a PSR whose MVB is B~~~(v~~ 'V n )t (2 ) then for each S2-pref ix head-variable ui matching exactly cne desc~#iption A ov! in the pattern, add JJ a link Ui=Vj (whsre Vj occupies the same argument-place in B~~ as does vf J in the predicate B of the pattern) 1 for ui to match a description Ajvj, there must be an expression Ajui in the ISR.
For instance, pqlr earlier example (20) r (20) This bread was sold to John by the Italian baker.
contains the constituents BRW, JOrIN, BAKER, and SELL8 They are linked in accordance with the pattern (21), which stated fhat bakers typically sell baked goods to people.
3ere BR~Av in (20) matches (by implicatfon) BAKE~GOOD in (21), BAKER in (20) matches BAKZR Ln (21), JWN matches HUMAN, Bnd SW matches SELL.
iiecall that the Intersection Strategy in (19) debmines just which patterns are called up far a giben sentence.
Th~re will usually only be a limited number of activated patterns, Next consider the Contradiction ~limination Strategy.
An abbreviated verEIion of it is aiven in (29) Roughly, the rule %ests which roles each NP could play without leading to a contradicption, Then it checks whether this would lead to a unique combined role assignment for all noun phrases, and if so, it accepts this combination as the interpretation.
(29) Contratiiction Elimination Strateevr (1) Let vlaSav be prefix head-variablea of a single rn type T, and ul...u WB-arguments of the same type TI n (23 add each combinatorily possible non-contradictory link Vito a list: if there is a uniaue combinead 3 m-tuple of lank8 vl=ud & . & v,=uk (where no ui or vi OCCUF~ more than once), then add this m-tuple of ZLnks to the SR.
An example is shown in (30)' (30) Tne cheese had been seen by the mouse.
PSRa (THE~~CHEES~X)(THX~~MOUSE~)(E~~,Z~)~SE~~~Z~Z~ 2 Non-contradictory linkst x=zp.
y=zp y=ze (zl must be ANIMATE, x is INANIMATE)!
Comb.ined 2-tuple of links; x=z2 & FBR : ~THEX : CHtEESEbc ) (THEY ~BIOUSE~) C SEEyx 2 Notice that even though mouse, taken by itself, corrld be either logfcal subject or object of see, the combination mouse/cheese has a unique semantic relation to see, because cheese can of course only be logical object of see.
The ~an~nicai Order Stratem is shown in (31).
iioughly, the strategy attempts to equate the surface order of the major clause oonatituents with 'their "deep order I I (31) Canonical Order Stratenar (1) Let vl, .a,v rn (m>l) be prefix headvariables of a single type T (where Vi precedes vj; for i< j(m), and let ul,e.~,u, be type T argument places of MVB (where ui precedes u for i<j~n) 8 9 (2) then each Vi not yet linked to any matru-constituent is linked to the MVB-argument ui, unless MVB has the feature PASV in the syntactic structure.
Far example, let (33) be the preliminary SR of (32): (32) John gave the cat some milk.
Here the first three prefixes are not yet linked to any matrix-constituent, and their head-yariablee &, y, p, are of the same type.
Hence they are linked as in (34), yielding, after simplification, the find SR (35).
Finally, 3 describes the svntax-sensitive rule.
It is seneuive to the fdature 3?Aw of the verb and links the constituents marked S7Mr OBJl, 0BJ2, and AGenT to the main verb, insofar as this has not been done by earlier strategies.
(36) Wtu-sensit-ive NNB-rRulet (1) 2he first MVB-argument is linked to the prefix head~&t?ia5le pointlng to: {a) the SW-phrase if MVB is not marked PASV; (b) the AGT-phrase if there is such a phrase: (2) link the prefix head-variable pointing to 8 (a) an ORTI-phrase to the second MVB-argument1 (b) an OBJ2-phrase to the third WB-argument; (3) if MVB is PASV Unk the prefix head-variable pointing to the SBJ-phrase to the remaining free (but not the f irst-) MVB-argument.
An example is given in (37)d~ere as elswhere in this paper, "#" atande for initial and "$" for final clause boundary).
(37) # The churchSBJ had been givenPASv the moneyow2 $ L#Pos~c~] by the bakerACT $a PSRI first clalaset (T~B~:CHURCH~)(THE~~~ONEYX)(E~~X~Z~) tliIV~z~z~2~ 7 Links; x pdints to OBJ2.
hence x=zg; y pomt.8 to S0J of a PASV verb, hence y=z2 by option (3) of rule (36)l FS3 f6r first clause8 (THEY~C~~URCX~) (THEX:MONEYX) (~2~) CGIVE~~Y~ 1 PSR for by-clauser (THEZIBAKERZ) Linkr z points to AGT-phrase, hence z=zl by option (lb)i VXII a DIFFEi3ENT XOD3S OF PROCESSING Let me interrupt here to consider the practical problem of constructing an automatic sentence recognizer.
Some aspects of the thapry I have just sketched may not be optimal for a ~omputational model, even though they seem appropriate for a psychological model.
For instance, to a pefson engaged in normal conversation accuracy of understanding is not very crucial most of the time" Often, the goal may only be to '-get the essentials," and if some mistake &s made, it is simply corrected later on.
This "normal mode of processingw is what the psychological model sets out to describe.
Now, in the case of an artificial intelli~rtnce system, one would probably demand higher accuracy, so as to minimize the need for correctionsm This is, in some ways* similar to the situation where you put subjects in a psychulinguistic experiment.
They usually abandon the "normal mode of processingw very soon and instead employ the strategies that guarantee best performance for the specific experimental task they are faced with . To give an example, consider the common type of experiment where a subject has to verify sentences like those in 138).
(38a) 5 precedes 13.
(38b) 5 is preceded by 13.
(384 13 is preceded by 5.
In order to interpret such sentences correctly, his knowledge that 5 in fact precedes 13 is of no help whatsoever to the listener, because true sentences occuf together with false ones in this game.
Therefore, he will soon drop all semantic short cuts --which he normally eaploys-and interpret the sentences purely on the basis of their syntax.
In a way, therefore, such experiments do not really tell us anything about normal speech processing.
Still, such conditions o'f heightened aecuracy may be just the onee we want to apply to the artificial intelligence system.
Let us therefore consider how such a non-normal mode of processing could be sinulated in our theory.
Now, looking back at the Linking Strategies in (22) above (~lnking by Variable Type, Pattern latching, ContradictinnXlimination, Canonical Order, ana Syntax-sensitive MVB-~ule), there is indeed ar.
obvious way of simulating the "high accuracy procedure," namely by dropping type 2, 3, and 4 strategies.
'Phese coflstitute the "shore cuts" which work 90% of the time, but sometimes lead to misinterpretations.
Notice that the result is still not a syntax-governed model, because most of the linking would still be handled by the syntax-free ne'chod of Linking4by Variable Type, and syntactic btruc tare ~ould still be erased in clause-intervals, As a matter of fact, in this last respect I think it is possible to go even further than I have done here, and erase syntactic structure after each major clause constituent (i.e., after each NP, adverb, or main verb), retaining only its functional feature, which is then simply integrated into the semantic representatbn.
I have already done this here for the constituent ~ain~er~, so in a way this woula only be a logical extension of my proposal Looking at the syntax-sensitive MVB-Rule (36), it is evident that it rerers exactly to those functional features, namely SBJ, OBJ1, OBJ2, MVB, and AGT.
It would seem, then, that even for purposes of artific'ial in%lligence, it may be preferable to operate with a parallel processing model, thereby minimizing the size of the syntactic gltructl~re and the amount of syntactic operations.
Apart from this, I would like to argue that the essential ingredients.
of Pattern Matching and Contradiction-Elimination are still required for any adequaze tJleo~.
Ws-bri~g back to the sixth type of Semantic Linking Strategies, namely Alternative Linking Strategies.
IXsWALTERNATNE LINKING STRATEGIES" Alternative Linking Strategies apply if the normal strategies (types 1-51 have failed to produce a semantically acceptable reading.
These strategies rely heavily on the Semantic Knowledge Rules.
The most important and most general (and the only one to be discussed in the present paper) is the Obvious Connection Strategy in (39).
It says, roughly, that if a variable g cannot be linked to the RnB then if the encyclopedia contains a rule conne~ting q to same other entity 11' then try and link this new entity yo to the MVB.
(393 Obvious Connection Stratear If the head-variable u cd a prefix (QTF~UIAU) cannot be lhked to its appropriate IWB-argument V, and both u and v point to a rule in the encyclopedia such that a connection (~~~~u't~u')[~uu'~between u and u' is derivable, then t (a) qhange (QTF~UIP-~) to <QTF~U'Z(QTF~U~AU)(BU~ & CUU')), (b) link ut to v.
For Instance, consider again sentence (9b)l (9b) They published Wodehouae immediatela he came over.
s indicated in (40), the object of PUBLISH must be some ritten work, and Wodehoyse of course does not qualify as uch.
Therefore, the l5nR between x odeho house) and the ogical object ye of PUBL~~H is rejected.
Notice that this s just the kind of "semantic anomaly test" which was central o the Contradiction-Elimifiation Strategy Its intuitive asis is obviousr the listener normally assumes that the peaker is trying to make sknse, and therefore, he will eject all non-sensical interpretations.
40) They published Wodehouse.
P3Rr (THEplz:THEYz) (THE~IWODMOUSEX) (~y* ) t PUBLISHZ~'~ ISR t WRITEiix & HUMANX & ANXMATEX I WRITTNWRKy' & -ANIMATEy' .rr Encyclopedic Pattern; (TYPX :WRITEXx) (TYP~;WRITINWRKJI) [(REATEX$] Rule (39) changes (THEX~WODMOUSEX) in the PSR to: {BY; (THEX r WODMOUSEx) (WRITTNWRK~ & CREATEX~)) Link added by Rule (391 I y'y', yielding the FSR: (THE~~Z~THEYZ)<E~I (THEX IIWODEHOUSEX) (WRITTNWRK~&CREATE~~)~ ~PUBLISHZ~ ] Now, staying with our sentenae (40) hey published h ode house), if you know that Wodehouse was a writer you also know that he created written works3 and ths new entity introduced by this encyclopedic rule, namely "written works created by Wodeh~use,~ is the one which is interpreted as .logical object of the predicate PUBLISH.
This then is the kind ofWsernantic detourw descrttJeb by tRe ObvTous ConnectLon strategy, and this strategy is applicable to the other sentences in (9) too 10 Now, I think the sentences in (9) exemplify something that happens all the time in speech: namely omission of the obvious.
I also think it would be extremely inconvenient if we had to ask people to use only their best Sunday Grammar when conversing with an English-speaking robot.
Me might as well ask them not to use pronouns, or to speak at a constant pitch of 4.00 Hertz.
To be competitive, the robot should undecstand Monday Gramar as well, and that means, sentences like those in (9) Xr CLAUSE-TO-CLAUSE LINKIKG For the remainder, 3: would like to discuss clause-to-clause 1Mcing.
The dieti~lguishing feature of my proposal, as will 10 See ~chank(1972) for a different approach to the problem of recovering implicit information.
He outlines, for instance, a method by which "I like books" would be expanded into the conceptual equivalent of "I like to read books".
SchankDs theory is baqed on wconceptual casesw and lexical decomposition rather than meaning postulates.
For instance, he claims that "John would be pleased by Il:ary8s going" is a proper part of the meanhg of John wants Marv to come home, while in my terms "John would be pleased by !daryw s going" is merely an allowable inference which may or may not be drawn.
Failure to Eraw an allowable inference explains the possibility of holding contradictory beliefs . For instance, somebody might judge John's uncle left to be true, while at the same time believing that the brother of John's mother or father left was false, because he failed to apply the mean%% rule relating uncle and brother of mother or father.
It is difficult to see how a theory basedon lexical decomposition would explain such f&c ts Certainly, it would be unreasonable to claim that a person has not understood the sentence John's uncleJaft unless he also is aware of the synonymy relation between this sentence and the brother of John's mother or father Left be recalled, is that syntactic structure is erased clause-byclause.
The problem, therefore, is to show that sentences containing more than one clause can in fact be interpreted correctly without referring to the full syntactic structure of any (completed) earlier clause.
Consider first wPost-clauses" e, clause-final adverbs, temporal nouns, and preposition-phrases Tliey are already covered by the strategy of Linkillg by Variable Type discussed earlier.
For instance, consider again sentence (25a).
(yesterday the father of tne boy sang horribly in the bath).
It contains the two P08-b-clauses horribly and in the bath; and it was shown earlier how they are linked to the main clalase by Variable Type The only smtac tic information required for this operation was the marking of the MVB in the semantic representation* (41) indicates roughly how relative clauses are integrated.
(~ctuall~, there are some complications here, but they are irrelevant to the present discussion; the main point here is that again no reference need be made to the syntactic strracture of the first clause.
For details, see ~eimold (f orthcomina where coordinate clauqes, comp&rison-clauses, and various sl~bjectleos complement-clauses are treated as well).
(41) # The girl (if who was tired 3) giggled q.
(TMEX:GIRLX)[--~ and (~y) [T1i(E~yl link, y-xj integrated structure a (T~IEX I GIRLX & TIi-iEDx) C -7 Next consider circumstantial clairses like because the kan~aroo ium~ed in (43).
The strategy for these claus~s, stat-ed in (42), does again not refer to the syntactic structure of the first clause* (42) Circumstantial Clause Ruler Substitute the matria of the main clause for the free s-argument of the JUNCtor of the circumstantial clause, and join the prefix of the main clause before the prefix of the circumstantial clat~se.
(43) # The boy wap nappy $(# lbecause JUNCJ the kangaroo jumped$) (THEIS : BOYX) [HAPPYX 1 and (THX~ 1 KANGA~) CBEGAUSL ( Q,JUMPY) 3 "xJ '?
The same holds true for complement-clauses like that the cake was ~oisoned in (45).
The corresponding strategy is given in (44).
(44) Com~lement Clause Ru1e.r Substitute the SR of the complement-clause for the free s-argument of the MVB of the main clause.
(45) # J ohn btlieved $ ( LYcompll that the 2ake was pcdecncd 4) (THEX~JOHNX)LBELIEV~~X an41 (THE~ICAKE~)[~~EDNED~~ d FSRr (TH-I JOHNX )CBKLIFNE$ x, (THE~~CAKE~) (POISONED~) 3 7 In sum, the principle of clause-by-clause erasure of syntactic structure seems ihdeed compatible with the requirements of clause-to-clause lirling.
The exception is the feature MVB, and it was suggested earlier that this syntactic feature is integrated into the semantic representation Notice also that certain aspects of syntactic structure are reboverable from our semantic representations.
For instance, the order of the prefixes in the SR reflects the surface order of the NP'a of a clause.
Hence, if certain constructions require access to such syntactic aspects, this i8 still not incompatible with erasure of syntactic structure in clause intervals.
or instance, coordinate clauses and certain subjectless complement clauses do often require identification of the surface subject.
For detailed discussion, see Reimold (forthcoming) . ) X-I r THE "TEMPORAL SEQUENCE STEIATEGY " The last strategy discussed here concerns the tense of consecutive clauses.
When we interpret sentences S1, 52 in a text or sentence conjunct, where S3, and S2 have the same tense, we often assign a relative chrondlogy to the events described by these sentences.
I will refer to the principle assigning such a chronology as the Temporal Sequence Strategy.
For example, consider (46) (Agatha Christie, Thev came to Baghdad, pmlOO)t (46) Then his head jerkedtl back a little and he lay still.
t2 Assigning PAST(^^) to the first clause and PAST(^^) to the conjoined clause in (46) does not account for actual comprehension: the listener knows that t2 is later than tl, even though there is no overt sequewe marker (e sg*, before, after, then) As a first approximation, the strategy might be stated as f 011 ows t (47 ) Tem~oral Sequence stratem (preliminary) I Given two main or conjoined clauses C1, C2 such that C1 precedes C2 and the time tl of C1 has the same "tense predicatew (e.g., PAST, FUTURE) as the time t2 of C2, then assume that DIRFRBC tp= (47) will require several modifications . First, the rule holds for certain nan-tensed clauses as well, as illustrated by (48) (~hesr cameto Baghdad p 044) 8 (48) Then he was out, across the Khan, back into the Suq.
. The full interpretation of (48) must specify that the time of out precedes that of acrcws, which in turn precedes that of bacq.
Since across and back had no overt tense predicate in 7 i48), the strategy must somehow be Liberalized to include SUC~ C~S~S.
In this connection, consider also (49)(~hey came to Baghdad.
pa711 1 (49) Never.
I thought, would the plane land.
It went round and round*:! and roilndt,.
t 1 If we assumed that tpt2=t3 in (49), then the two conjoined phrases pnd round and round* should be redundant in the same sense in which Fido ia a dog and is a doe: and is a dog is.
However, (49) can quite naturally be interpreted as "the plane went-round and then round and then roundN be..
as 45.
-DIRPREC t2 & _t3 DIRPREC t3).
Next, the Temporal Sequence Strategy seems blocked if some general semantic principles \in ~articular, Pattern Matching) suggest a chronology caR#licting with that imposed by the Temporal Sequence Strategy.
For instance, consider a dialogue like (50): (50a) What's the matter with John?
(50b\ Oh, he broketl his arm.
He felltZ off his bike.
Here the second sentence in (sob) is interpreted as preceding the first sentence in (50b) temporally, counter to what the Temporal Sequence Strategy would prediict.
The reason is obviousr there is a perceived causal connection between the sentences, such that the second sentence describes the cause of the first.
Since a cause must precede its effect, t2 must precede tl in (50b).
To formalize this, we can make use of Pattern ittcbing.
For instance, the encyclopedia would contain a pattern like (51), and there would furthermore be a meaning rule like (52).
(52) (AU.,tl,t2) LCAUSE<A(.
dl. a),B(.
at2. 43 IMPL tl CIRPREC t2 3 We need only make sure that the pattern (51) is activated by the two sentences he broke his arm and he fell off his bike in (~oB), which can bedone by calling up all patterns which are in the intersection of the main verbs of the two sentences.
pa or instance, break and fell both point to (51)).
In effect, we have to add the following principle to the Temporal Sequence Strategyr (53) Causal Connection Constraint: If C1, C2 are not conjoined by pd, call up all Encyclopedic Rules in the intersection of the MVBVs of C1 and C2.
If 4 DIRPREC tl is heuristically derivable from a pattern, then add this link tu C2 and do not apply the Temporal Sequence Strategy.
11 Another
restriction seems to be that the Temporal Sequence Strategy is inapplicable to proaessive tense.
For instance, while tl must precede t, in (54), they seem to be roughly simi~ltaneous in (59, even though liatina a ci~mette and leaving a room normally count as "instantaneous" events (see 11 The condition against conjunction by and is necessary since pnd can never mean "and before that..," For instance, a sentence like pe broke his arm and fell off his bike.
cannot be interpreted as "he broke his arm because he fell off his bike.
tB the "Short Events Principle" discussed below) (54) She lit a cigarette and left the room.
tl t2 (55) She was lightingt a cigarette and leavingt2 the raom.
1 progressive tense turns events into non-instantaneous events.
Finally, I come to he most general and important restriction on the Temporal Sequence Strategy, Phis restriction is of a subtle semantic nature: it states that the strategy is applicable to clauses C1, C2 on1~ if the events described by C1 and C2 are unlikely to he simultaneous.
Consider, fqr instance, the following sentence: (56) She just stood there and looked at him.
It is perfectly possible for someone to stand somewhere and at the same time to look at somebody.
Hence no temporal sequence is imoosed on stood and looked.
By contrast, in (57) (~heu came to Baghdad, p.76) wen3 and stood must be interpreted as seqyenced, since one .cannot at the same time a somewhere and stand somewhere elser (57) She wenttl out from the bar onto the terrace outside and stood% by the railing... 2 Note that it will not do to define.the condition of "possible simultaneity' directly for verbs.
We cannot say, e.g., that clauses containing stand and a must be"sequencad".
For instance, in (58) and (5% stood and went would be interpreted as simultaneous, the reason being, of course, that different agents are involved, which makes simultanei-ty c onc e ivabl e . (58) Jack stood by the window.
Jane went to the door.
(-59) Jane went to the door.
Jack stood by the window.
It is clear, then, that a detailed semantic analysis is need6d to determine "possible simultaneity of two events.
The principle can be stated as follows: (60) possible Simultaneitv Constraint: Call u~ allEncyclopedic Rules in the intersection of the MVBms of.
C1 and C2.
Unless tl t2 is derivable (stricrtly or heuristically) the Temporal Sequence Strategy is inapplicable There are some cases, however, where two events are nocmally ihterpreted as sequenced, even though they could, stric-tly speaking, be sirnultaneous~ For instance, it is theoretically possible to light a cigarette while g&tting up, and one certainly would not want to add a rule to the encyclopedia stating that two such events are unlikely to be' sinnaltaneo~s~ Nonetheless, (61) is normally interpreted a8 sequences I (61) John got up and lit a cigarette.
Aather than adding some ad hoc principle whlch somehow codes the intuition that it is awkward to strike a match and hold it to the cigarette while geteing up, we can exnlain this as a consequence of a much more general heuristic principle.
Notide that both clauses of ( 61 ) describe instantaneous events.
Now, the shorter tdo events, the lower the probability that they coincidel For instance, the probability that the radio plays at the same time when there is ashot is duch higher than the probability of there being a shot at the same time wi~h a hiccough.
As another illustration.
consider (62)(~hev came to Baadad, p.
72): (62) With a fatherly smile he withdrewel, Victoria sat down, 2 on the Ded and passed, an experimental hand over her hair.
3 Although
it is Legically conceivable that all three events el-e3 happened simultaneous~y, the normaL in~erpretation of these sentences takes them to be sequenced, because they are short and henca unlikely to coincide.
This means, then, that we must add the following heuristic principlm t (631 Sheet Events Princur If C1, C2 denote $nst$uvt@neous events e, JNSTANT tl and STA ANT t2 are derivable from M-rules and E-rules) assume that tl#t2.
In summary, the Tem:poporal Sequence-Strategy takes on the followinq form: (64) Tem~oral Seauenee ~trate~v(revised)t (1) Let C1, C2 be two main or conjoined clauses such that CL is to the left of C2 and the time tl of the MVB of C1 has the same tense predicate as the time t2 of the MVB of C2, or t2 or both tl and t2 have no tense predicate; and neither tl nor t2 has the tense predicate PROGRESSIVE; (2) call up all Encyclopedia Rules in the intersection of the WB of C1 and the WB of C2; (a) if C2 is not introduced by and, and 2 DIRPREG tl is heuristically derivable from the active E-rules and i-rules, then add 42 DLSPREC ti and break off the application of this strategy; (b) if ei'ther tl= or INSTANT t~& it? dderi-e (strictly or heuristically) from the active E-rules and M-rules, then add the link DIRPRZC t9.
BIBLIOGRAPHY Abrams.K. .& Bever, ~~~~1969.
Sntactic structure modifies attention during speech perce tion.
Quarterly Journal of '3s~erirnefital ~ssc holo~~v 21, 2 8 0-290.
Bever, T.Q.1970.
The cognitive basis for linguistic structu~es.
Cornition and the develonment of laneua~e, ed.
by JaR~Hayes.
New Yorkr Wile'y & Sbns.
Caplan,D.1972.
c'lause boundaries and recognition latencies for words in sentences* Percention & Fsvcho~hvsics 12, 73-76.
Christie, A.I.951.
They kame to Baghdad.
Yew Yorkr Dell.
CoXlins,A .Mot & Quillian,M.R.19720 How to make a lanwage user.
Ornanization of memorrv, ed . by E l Tulving & W . Donaldson New York~ Academic Press Fodor, J .A ., Bever, T .G, 8~ Garrett, Me 1974.
The ~svcholoav of lanmage.
An introduction to ~sucholfnsruistics and eneratiye =ammar.
New York: NIcGraw-Hill.
GarRett, Ma, Bever, T .G ., L Fodor, J .A a1966 The acf;ius.,-use of grammar in speech perception.
Perce~tion & Psvcho~h~sics 1, 30-32.
Katz,J.J., & Fodor, ~~~~19630 The structure of a semantic theory.
Lm 39.2, 170-2100 Kuno, S,1965.
The predictive analyzer and a path elimination technique.
Communications of the ACM 8 e7, 453-462 Marslen-Wtlson, W,1973 Linguistic structure and speech shadowing at very short latencies.
NaSure 244, 522-23.
Nash-Webber, B.1974.
Semantics and speech understanding.
BBN Report 2896.
Cambridge,, Mass.:Bolt, Beranek & Newman.
Petrick, s .R .1966.
A pro am for transformational syntactic analysis AFCfiL-66-69K Bedford, Mass c Air Force Cambrf dge Research Labs.
-------.1973.
Transf orrnational analysis Natural languaae rocessinq, ede by R.
Rustin. New York: Algorithmics Press.
Qui?lian,M.R.1969.
The teachable langudge comprehendera A simulation program and theory of language.
Communications of the ACM 12, 459-476.
Reirnold, P.forthcoming.
An integrated system of perceptual strategies: Syntactic and semantic interpretation of English sentencess Columbia University doctoral dissertation Rieger, D.1973.
Conceptual memory.
Stanford University doctoral dl ssertatton.
Schank,R.1972.
Conceptual dependency: A theory of natural language understandine.
Co~ltive Psvcholoey 3, 552-631.
Weinreich,U,1966 Explorations in semantic theory.
mrera4. trends in linm%stfcs 111, ed.
by T~A~Seheok.
The Hague1 Mouton.
Winograd,T01971.
Procedures as a representation for data in a computer program for understanding natural language.
M .I .T . Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Report A1 TR-17.
Cambridge, Massla Mo1.T.
Woods, W .A .I973 . An experimental parsing system for transition netyork grammars Natural lanauaae ~rocessing, e,d by R.
Rustin . New Yorka Algorithmics ~ress' .

