American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 82 A MODEL FOR KNOWLEDGE AND ITS APPLICATION TO DISCOURSE ANALYSIS BRIAN PHILLIPS University of Illinois at Chicago Circle 60680 Copyright @ 1979 Association for Computational Linguistics TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction.
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . L..
4 A
model for knowledge . Nodes Arcs Par adigmati,~ relations Va r ie ty Instance Typical Manifestation Syn tagmatic relations Discursive relations The metalingual relation Status relations Negation Inhe r i@ance Episod ic and systemic menlory Quantification Processes in the network Pa ttl-tracing Pattern-matching Discourseanalysis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . 44 Thq st^-IIC ture of c~heren t d ~SCCU~S~ 44 Anaphora 44 Spatial, temporal, and causal cohesion 45 Thematicity 46 The role of the encyclopedia 52 Anaphora 53 Spatial, temporal.
and causal cohesion 5.4 Thematicity 56 Implementation..
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . a . . . . . 57 Processes 58 Paradigmatic path tracing 58 Causal connectivity conditfon 58 Discovering general and apecif ic propositions 58 ?letslingual decomposi tisn 60 Iletalinp,ual abstraction 60 Inference of omitted discursive relations 62 The system 62 Analysis of some stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 Common pat terns 65 A boat capsizing 67 A fall into water 70 Embedded themes 72 INTKODUCTTON An important csntribution of natural Language processing has been to direct a ttr:n tion to tile structure of 1~~1gi~age at the discau~.se I I level, wl-rich hna led r6 n greater awareness uE the rote of meaning" in Iangtxage For "A text is best: regarded as n SEIAhTXG unit; a unit not a£ form but of meaningt' (Ilalliday ct Ilasan, 1976, p.
2). This being so, discsursc analysis will deepen ur tlndcrstanding sf meaning and vice-versa In this paper 1: present a rnodel, of nzcaning stran~ly inf'l~lencccl hy Ilays (].969a, 3.969b, 1970, 1973) and stlow hob I t; is able to ccciptwre tf~c otganizattnn of L!~HCDU~SC~.
In particular T seek to define the organization of cahercnt di~courst-.
and to slaow llow knowledge is u'sed to inhex a coherent structure when, as usually is the case, the surface forrr: is ell f~3tic.
Tt~e hypathescs arc a~sed to buiLd an automati-c system tcn test the coherence of d ibscnnrsc.
A f hO'fJR1, FOl< IiiJCIE.JX,l?
DCJ; The pl~ilosopf~ic stnr~cc -fs taken that utrr knowlr.dg.,c of ;I csncep is the f~icarling of ct~at concept: : "5arrtcanc wt~o knows wi:at tik-t.r means . . Is required to know that w~ercntyp~tal tigers are striped" (Futnanr, 1975, p 249) 1 )!any models of kr,owX.edfie 'have bccn d<welopeb for use In computatioraal env-dr:,nmcnts ..
Samp arc.
fc~ nrcstr ic tt.d dl-~mrai.rrz; (Black, 1908: Ebbrow, 1968; Colby, 1973; Raphael, 1968; Winograd, 1W1; etc).
The present model is raore'in the tradition of Klein, Oakley, Suurballe, and Ziesemer (1 972), Quillian (1 969), Rumelhar t, Lindsay, and Normaa (1972), Schank (1975ai, Shapiro (1971), Simmons (1970), and Wllks (1972), where no particular context is prescrfbed* It will be apparent that at many points the present model draws upon these earlier syatems.
Some of the differences between systems are probably differences in notationHowever no system Is at a stage of co~staney or completeness that makes it worthwhile to devote much effort to establishing the equivalences Although it wauld be possib1.e to present only the paws that I believe to be novel, giving the whole system in a common notation will ease the task of the readerThe model, hereafter called the encyclopedia, endeavors to be consistent with available psychological and linguistic views of the structure of language and t'hought, for any automated language system must closely imitate the ttorkings of human cognition to be successful (Collins & Quillfan, 1972).
The encyclopedia encodes common knowledge sf the world which may differ from scientifically accurate descriptions.
Putnam (1975) calls such knowledge "stereotypical": The fact that a feature . . . le, included in the stereotype associated with a word X does not mean that it is an analytic truth that all Xs have that feature, nor that most Xtl have that feature, nor that all normal Xs have that feature, nor that some Xs have that feature.
. . Dtwovering that our stereotype is based on nonnormal or unrepresentative members of a natural.
kind is not discovering a logical contradiction.
a . [but) The fact is that we could hardly communicate if moat of our stereotypes weren't pretty accurate as far as they goe (pp.
250-251) The encyclopedia is achematized and ihplemented as a directed graph; in current parlance it is a network model.
Nodes characterize concepts and arcs relations between conceptsv The most general statement to make about the model is that relations and aoneept types are the necessary system primitives; some concepts may be primitive, but the model does not depend on the* existence of primitive concepts Discussion wi2 1 cover the nodes and relations of the model.
Attention will also be given to network processes.
No psychol~gical validity is claimed for the content of any of the structures shown; the claim extends only to the relational sttucture Questions of content must be answered empiricallyNodes There are four types o.f nodes: -9 event Yr entit .-attribute, and modality.
The first three correspond to simple verb simple noun, and simple modifier, respectively.
The fourth type of node is novel Its rale in *he system will become clear after a description of arcs * For the meantime it will, have to suffice to say that it is used in the spatio-temporal causal, belief, and hiersrchic organization of knowledge * Its ancestor in linguistic theory is "modal" in the model/proposition dichotomy of Fillmore (1969).
Sch~bert (1976) has predicate nodes that are similar in motivation, but different in use from modality nodes.
-6 Nodes of the encyclopedia are not labeled (Collins & Quillian, 1972).
An arc, termed name, points from a node into a dictionary of print names.
For clarity nodes in diagrams will be annotated, but this should not be taken as representing the implementation, which is as shown in Figure 1.
rock I DICTIONARY I ENCYCLOPEDIA I I 1 NAME person Peter Adnt Sally I Figure 1 Labeling nodes In all the following figures is an event, entity or attribute nodeAnnotations on these nodes are enclosed in 1, <>, and [I, respectivelyModality nodes appear as o and are never annotated.
Arcs Five types of arcs are used in the network: paradigmatic arcs ate taxonomic, syntagmatic arcs iorm propositions, discursive arcs link propositions, the rnetalingual arc is used to associate a concept with a story in network form that defines the concept, and status arcs characterize beliefs and desires + Paradigmatic Relations Variety.
A readily observable aspect of human behavior is the existence of folk taxo~~omies.
These have been studied in detail by ett~nasemantlcist s in order to discover their cogniti~e significance and structure: Man is by nature a classifying animal.
His continued existence depends on his ability to recognize similarities and differences between objects and events in Iris physical universe and to make known these similar ities and differences linguistically . Ifideed, the very development of the human mind seems to have been closely related to the perception of discontinuities in nature.
In view of this, the study of folk taxonomic systems, which have received a great deal of interest in recent years, has a high significance in interpreting the logical processes going on in our minds, as well as in understanding the application and utility of the taxoncmfc systcms themselves.
(Raven, Eerlin, 6 Breedlove, 1971, p 8 1210) For example, mammal, bird, and reptile might be classified as kinds of vertebrates* Tn the network, the relation is termed variety (abbreviated to VAR in the figures), Figure 2 diagrams this knowledge.
<pecyn (sleepwalk)) (talk in sleep)) 2 4' 1rt)> 1 / CAUSE /nnrnrr-/*ram\\ ((hairy (William Proxmire William (makes foreign policy William Proxmire) Proxm ire) statements)) Figure 2 Paradigmatic organization Varietal nodes are seen as representing concepts at a categqrical level, hence variety is the category-subcategory relation.
Berlin, Breedlove, and Raven (1968) show the existence of covert categories in folk taxonomies, Lee, nodes having scientific, but not folk, names, It say vertebrate" in Figure 2.
These categories are revealed by memory, classification, and other experiments.
ThLs is counter to the view of Conklin (1962) for whom concepts must have monolexemic labels.
Covert categories enable Raven et ale (1971) to show a degree of uniformity in taxonomies: about five hierarchic levels with seldom more than five hundred items under one node.
Berldn et al.(1968) claim that items in a folk taxonomy form non-intersecting categories+ i .e., the structure is strictly tree-like.
This view is not held here, for a typewriter can be classified both as a machine and as a writing instrument.
Cobequently, varietal structures are not restricted to being treelike.
Loops, however, do not seem possible.
Nor is it necessary that A n~de have a name.
Enstance. kogic since Aristotle has distinguished between category (or type) and a specifk member of a category (token).
This membership relation is termed instance (IST).
For example, "William Proxmire" is an instance of "person", Figure 2.
Most instances are not named, takhg their name from their varietal parent, but a major exception is people, ebg., "~eter", "Aunt Sally", Figure 1.
Any path through the paradigmatic organization of knowledge which follows only arcs having the same dixectionality (termed a paradigmatic path) contains at most one instance arc.
Traversing this arc represents a cognitive transition from thinking about categorical concepts to thinking about particular concepts, e .g ., from thinking about man to thinking about Abraham Lincoln, or from blueness to the blue of your car.
Rumelhart st al.
(1972) use an ISA relatidn that cover8 both variety and gnstance, e.8~~ ISA(Luigi s,tavern) and ISA(tavern,establishment).
The present feeling is that a distinction does exist ; hence the two relations of the encyclopedia Typical.
A third condition of knowledge needs to be represented.
Concepts have both universal and occasional properties.
For example, "birds eat wormst' is an occasional, not universal, fact about birds as some never do, but bven those that do are sometlmeg Iound eating fruit, fish, or even not eating, withbut the proposition being necessarily false However, "birds have wings'' is expected to be true at all times for all birds; it is a pathological situation if a counter-example is f oubd.
To represept te arguments of occas2onal predications, the Dical (TYP) arc is used.
Thus the "blrd" in "bfrds eat worms" is as in Figure 2.
It is also possible to use the typical relation to attach occasional proper ties to members of categories, i .e., to instances.
In Figure 2 is show the represenation of "William Promire makes foreign policy statements" where this is a statement of an occasional habit rather than a record a specific act.
No positlon is taken on how noteworthy knowledge ie recognized as such in the development of the encyclopedia Manifestation.
The final paradigmatic relation is manif es-t-ation (MAN) This corresponds tothe phenomenon of object constancy: An object may undergo change in space and time, but it is still perceived as the same objee t.
For -ampla, William Proxmire before apd after his hair transplant is still William Proxmire.
Also an object may participate in many different actions but still preserve its identity, e.g., Albert Einstein playing a violin and Albert Einstein writing on a blackboard remains Albert Einstefn = TI the system each diffetefii situatj.9~ involves a distinct node.
To a node defined by an instance are linked, by manifestation arcs, nodes that correspond to an object in its different guises Manifestations of "William Proxmirett are shq~ln in Figure 2.
bnifestations do not ustPally have names different from that of their pareat instance; g rare exception tp this is the Evening Star and the Morning Star which are both Venus at different times of the day.
Maalfestatians of varietal and typical concepts are also possible.
The latter are used for pro~erties that are true of the concept but only at spme point or period of time, for example, "vertebrates are horn", Figure 2.
For typical arcs this notion is redundant as typical embodies spatial and temporal inde tgrminancy . However manifestation does have a use with the typical arc in representirrg ~oreference.
Suppose it can happen that a person can trip causing him to be hurt.
The Uperaon" in the encoded event is a typicalised "person", but it must be the same person that trips that is hurt.
Figure 2 shows the use of manifestation relations to indicate this identity.
More will be said later about the formal representation of the causal relation indicated in Figure 2.
If only typical arcs were used, the interpre~atian would b,e that anyone tripping could cause literally anyone to be hurt.
Multiple manifestations can also be used with variety if coreference needs to be marked.
[This next paragraph is almost certain not to make sense until the I I reader has completed as far as, and including, the section Tnheritance", and so he may clloose to leave it and return laterOther systems, Quillian (1969), Rumelhart et al.(19721, and Schank (1975a), do not use manifestation but capture object constancy by having one and the same node for a participant in all of its propositions.
This is a viable alternative.
Nevertheless, information on the relative standing of the appearances of the participant has to be representableIf a single node were used in the encyclopedia, the differentiation could be made on the modality nodes of rile propositions.
This route was not taken as it is more convenient, for example, to let the nature of the inherita'nce be determined completely in paradigmatic organization, rather than in a rnix ture of paradigmatic and discursive structures.
For even without manifestation, the varietal structure will require the process of inheritadce.
Of the four arcs, variety, typical, and manifestation can be iterated; instance cannot . Figure 2and 3 illustrate iterative arrangements of variety and manifestationThat typical also has this property is seen from cofisidering that "While dreaming, some people talk or sleep-walk".
None ot these propositions are universally true, but only of arbitrary people.
Figure 2 contains thie situation.
The above examples present only paradigms of entities.
but events and attributes also exhibit this kind of organization.
If paradigmatic structure is a loopless directed graph then there will be origin nodes, that is, nodes without entering arcs.
Can anything be said about the number or kinds of concepts associated with origin nodes?
It is speculated that entities can be divided into doma-ins of being each of which has its own paradigm.
Possible domains are thing, soul, role, time, etc.
Thus to represent Ford as President of the USA the structure in Figure 3 would be used.
Figure 3 also shows how the totality of John brown (JB) and his fragments, as i~ "~ohn Brown's body 1 ies mouLdering in the grave but his soul goes 'marching on" can be represented . Figure 3 Domains of being To date scholars have only studied entity paradigms in detail* Little investigation of attribute or event paradigms has taken place.
V It is hard to intuitively discern the hierarchical ordering of these concepts, i.e ., to know which concepts imply others.
Red, yellow, etc., are obviously varieties of color, but does having mass imply having color?--but many gases and glass have mass but are colorlesso Or does having color imply having mass?--but red light, blue jokes, etc Or are they quite independent attributes that happen to have a large intersection in their domain of applicability? fiese are all open question8 in the taxonomy of attributes.
The event paradigm is also open to much speculation.
Syntagmatic Relation8 Syntagmatic relations connect nodes from different paradigms (with one exception).
Relations of participation, similar td Fillmore s (1969) case relations, connect entities and events.
A relation of mlicatioa (APL) link$ attributes *to events or to entities rn A relation of part-whole (P-W) c~nnects a unity to its component^.
A syntagmatically related structure is termed a prpposlltion.
Four relations of participation are distinguished: agent (AGT), instrumental (INS), objective (ORJ), and experiencer (EXP) . The role characterized by each is derived from dichotomies animate/inanimate and causal/non-carnal, as given in Table 1 (Fillmore, 1969).
Animate Inan hate Causal AGENT INSTKWE~AL Non-causal EXPER IENC ER OBJECTIVE Table 1 Relations of Participation Thus "Angry Bill ferociously hit Fred with the handle of an axe" Is diagrammed as in Figure 4.
' <axe> Figure 4 Syn tagmatic organization The set of case relatkbns does not include locative and temporal relations.
Sentence adverb ials (Chobsky, 1965 ) are not part of SYntagmatic strucrare, but of the contextual structure, which fs here represented on modality nodes.
Bound adverbial8 are part of syntagmatic structure, e.g., "ferociously" above, and are related to the event node by a relation of application.
A part-whole relation is used in Figure 4 to show the relation of "handle" to "axe".
This relation differs from other eyntagmatic relations in that it connects nodes of the same type, emge, two entities.
A case can be made for this relation to be considered a paradigmatic relation; for the present it has been put in with the syntagmatic mainly because it is not used by the process of inheritance, of which more later.
Discursive RelatLons Propositions do not occur in isolation.
They are tied together in cognition in a number of ways.
The spatial, temporal, and causal connections are characterized by$iclcursive ares.
Intuitively th~e are relations between whole propositions and it is to fail to capture this feeling if, say, a cause relation directly link8 two event nodes.
Modality nodes are uaed to represent situations in Which the whole proposition la involved.
Though schematically linked to an event node; conceptually the modality belonse to the whole propoeition.
Discursive arca relate the modalities of propositions.
Thus "Mary slapped John because he chased her" is represented as in Figure 5.
Figure 5 Discursive organization -1 8The one causal relation, cswe, admits of no finer distinction.
Others (Schank, 1975a; Halllday & Haaan, 1975) distinguish three kinds ~f causation: reason, result, and purpose.
The single cause relation of the encyclopedia models the first tw direcrly.
Purpose (or enabling) causation is seen as separable into cauae together wf th a desire for the consequent.
For example, a cup may fell causing it to break.
The fall could be accidental or it could be deliberate with the purpose of breaking the cup . The same causal relation exists between the actions in both cases, but the analysis of the putposive situation will in-lve "desire".
Time arcs do permit subdivision.
A proposition may be simultaneous (SML) with another proposition: "Fred washed the car while John chased Mary", Figure 50 A sequenttal rn iering of propositions is also found, characterized by a sequence (SEQ) relation.
The suggestions made here for the organization of space are only a working set for which little justification can be offered: location (LOC)--a neutral statement of position, contact--in physical contact, and -* near far above below left, etc., which are self-explanatoryo -# -9 -9 -* Figure 5 represents the location of "Fred washed the car" as being tt garage".
Since this work was completed Sondheimer (1977) has propaeed an analysis of space and the.
The Me talingual Relation Speech acts do not make use only of forms having physical reference,e.g., table, John, blue.
A most important aspect of language behavior is abstractionHuman social, scientific, and intellectual development is dependent on the ability to create and control abstract conceptsA quick appraisal of thi9 paragraph reveals many such concepts: language, behavior, bocial, etc . A system that seriously hopes to approach human capabil ities must have a corresponding ability.
One part of modeling abstraction 5s representation; but what is to be represen tedg AbsOrsc tion involves knowing a situation in which the nbst rac t term applies and replacing the sltu~tional description by the abstract term.
An example is "tragedy"The scene to which it is 19 applfcable is, say, Someone does a good act that: results in his death".
This definiens is encoded in rigure 6.
"Tragedy" names a single node.
Figure 6 Metalingual organization The general propositions of the definiens are conjoined using a modality node linked to the modalYties of the propositions by partwhole relations.
In general there nay be any number of levels of modalities related by part-whole.
To complete the association of the definiendum with its deftniens, a metallngual (PEL) arc links the former to the appropriate modality in the latter, Figure 6.
If any situation matches the definiens, then the abstract term is appropriate.
The process of matching will be discussed later.
The definiendum can also be any concept, the choice is fdiosyncrattc; there is no reason why this device cannot be used with apparently non-abstract concepts, for example, a dog could be "man's best iriend" for sowk, in contrast with a non-abstrabt definition of "canine animal" Wn-abstract definitions have the form "genus-specificata".
In the encyclapedia, the representation is made up from a node related by variety to the genus (animal), to which are attached the properties in the specificata (canine) Rumelhart and Ortony (1976) use a relation similar to metalingual, ISWHEN, but do not show how participants are equated fn the definiendum and definiens, nor the processes that use such definitions.
The metalingual arc is used in another context* Some propositions contain embedded propositions.
For uniformity it ie desirable to restrict participation in propositions to entity nodes.
Thus the matrix proposition has an unnamed participant in objective or instrumental role and this nsde is defined by a metalingual arc to the modality of the contained propositiono For example (1) Peter believes Fred chased the cat* is represented as in Figure 7.
<Fred> Figure 7 Embedding propositions .Status Relations Knowledge in an encyclopedia is a model of the beliefs of one person.
Nevertheless the knowledge is not all of the same status.
In addition to containing the person s beliefs, it ~ncludes representcation of beliefs about his own desires and of his bcliefs about the beliefs and desires of others.
His personal beliefs and desires interpret, control, and direct his personal activities.
The knpwledge about others 1s the basis for interacting and communicating with them.
For example, a conversation with a child about the structure of matter is quite different from one with a nuclear physiclet because of different conceptions about their levels of knowledge and hence what can be taken for granted.
One has knowledge about individuals, e-g., your brother, Nelson Rockefeller, etc ., and about groups, e.g., politicians, sports wr lters, Russlans, etc.
A disti-ncti on can be made between subconscious and conscious knowledge.
Tbe former is, for example, the knowledge of language underlying its use or (2).
(2) The Sun Circles the Farth.
Conscious knowledge is learnt or communicated knowledge, e .g -, what one has been taught about the solar system.
here is no reason for the two krnds of knowledge to be in accord regarding the same enti ties . One has learned, for example, that the Farth circles the Sun.
Subconscious beliefs of self are unmarked in the encyclopedia.
Subconscious beliefs of another are indicated by a believe arc between a node representing the believer and a modality node aovering the network representaion of the content of the beliefs.
The subconscious belief of (2) by "people" is given in Figure 8.
Figure 8 Knowledge status Conscious beliefs are represented as propositions embedded within an event "beLieve".
An example is given in (1) with its representation in Figure 7.
It is not only propositions that have belief status, but also simple concepts, e .g ., ghosts.
To accomodate this information, the placing of modality nodes is generalized.
Previously only proposf tions were associated with modalities; now any node can have its own modality.
On this modality information about a concept's existence and belief status can be represented, as in Figure 8 for "Fred Smith".
It is unlikely that each node or proposition is immediately linked to its believer.
Using part-whole relations and modality nodes, domains ob belief, which may intersect, can be created as in Figure 8 for "Hugo" . Hendrix (1 975) partitions semantic networks to delimit domains of belief; here the same effect is gained through the use of modality structures.
The desires of people are situations that they would llke to exist.
The content of these goals can be represented by a modality covering (complexes of) propositions or single concepts, e-g., peaceIf the goals are subconscious, a desire relation links the desirer to the modal ty.
For consczous states, the modality is part of a metaliagually defined object ve of an event "desire".
In modeling behavior, these goals provide the situations that other b ehaviotal actions are intended to contribute towards achieving Negation Negation is a property that is marked on 4 modality.
The most common site for negative marking is a propos:itional modalityThus Fig~e 9 contains the proposition "I do not like tomatoes" \like 1 (tomatoes) Figure 9 Negation When some other constituent of a sentence is negated, say using strong stress, this is marked on a corresponding modality, so "John did not hit Mary" is encoded as in Figure 9.
It is not anticipated, that negation is a common feature in knowledge, for "A person sometimes learns a negative fact when it cont'radicts something that might be inferred by mistake or that is true for a similar concept But, most negative facts are never learned'' (Collins & Quillian, 1972, p . 319).
Inheritance A node will inherit properties from nodes higher in its paxadigmatic path* Quillian (1969) used superset relations for the same purpose.
In Figure 2, B inherits the properties of A, C those of B, D those of E, and E those of D.
Inherihance is transitive, thus E inherits properties from A, B, C, and D.
This permits parsimonious representation of properties: A property need only appear at the ancestor of concepts having the property.
Inheritance is inhibited only if the inheritable property is contradicted on a lower node.
For example, although the property "fly" may be associated with "bird", it is prevented from being inherited by "penguin" by having explicitly "penguin not fly".
The generality of inheritance depends on the form of representation of the property at the ancestor node.
Properties that are universally true at all times, e.g., birds have wings, are attached directly to a varietal node and are obligatorily true of all descendents.
If at any time a bird without wings were reported, it would be cause for further explanation.
Some other properties are always true but only at intermittent times, e.g., people eat, whose representation involves the manifestation relation.
It is not odd that a person can be seen not eating, but if you watched long enough, it would be fully expected to obeerve this behavior sometime Finally there are occasional properties that make use of the typical arc in their representation.
These proper ties are not universal, being merely noteworthy recollections about a concept, e.g., The French are rude.
It would well be possible to have a complete history of an example of the concept and not witness the property without being disturbed by its absence.
Episodic andL Sys ternic Memory Tulving ( I 972 ) distinguislles episod ic from semantic memory.
The former "receives and stores information aboht temporally dated episodes or events, and temporal-spatial relations between events" (p.
385). TH~ 'latter is knowledge a person posse sses about words and other verbal symbols, tl~ear meaning and referents, about relations among them, and about rules, formulas, and algorithms for the manipulation of these symbols, concepts, and relations.
Sqhan tic memory does not register perceptible properties of ~nputs, but rather cogni tlve referefits of inpbt signals.
(p. 386) Abelson (1975 ) distinguishes episodic from propositional memory, and Woods (1975) contrasts intensions with extensions along similar lmes.
The term I prefer, following Hays (1978), is systemic rather than semantic, propositional, or in tensional The localization in space and time of knowledge is represented .in the encyclopedia by spatial and temporal organization of propositions using the appropriate d&scursive relations.
A proper subpart of episodic memory is contained in paradigmatic organization.
Nanifestations of instances (remember there are also manifestations of varietal and typical nodes, so it must be thus stated) represent spatioQemporally localized inf onnation about members of categories Consequently' knowledge represented on manifestations of instances, or their manifestations, is in episodic memory.
This is only part of episodic memory as categorical knowledge can also be present.
For example, in "Jung changed our view of dreams", the reference is to the categorical notion of dreams, not to any specific ones.
Nor is it sufficient for a proposition to have a non-categorical participant to be m episodic memory for "Prior to the Revolution.
Russf an peasants were feudal serfs" cnotdins catpgorical gartici pants, yet is episo~ics The total extent of episodic memory is yltimately decided through spatial and temporal relatiion of discursive organizati~n, not by paradigmatic structure.
Ouan tif ication para dig ma ti.^ arcs have the capability of capturing the essence of quantification, .including scope To illustrate the facility, cons:ider (3) and (4) whlch are equivalettt to the Iormulae (5) and (6) Figure 10 encodes (3) and (4).
(3) There is a book that :js read by every scholar, (4) Every chorlgter knows a song.
(5) ax Vy [ (book(x) & scholarty)) 3 read (y,x)] (6) Vydx [ (song(x) & ohorister(y)) 3 know(y,x) J Figure 10 Quantification Xf for a given c.orister in (4) it is necessary to determine the song he knows, i be., to evaluate the Skolem function, the information is present as a predication of that individual and should be retrieved using his name, say "George" and r rink to me only with thine eyes" -in Figure 10.
It is also possible to give distinot representation to unquantlfied statements, such as (7), as in Figure 10.
(7) A person likes candy.
Paradigmatic arcs are here achieving reoresentational power equivalent to the partitioning of networks by Hendrix (1975)-30The above is a systemic rendition of "all".
The quantification can also be characterized episodically by every manifestat<on of a concept having the property.
Interpreting "all" (Woods, 1975), could call upon either systemic or episodic facts* A question containing a universal quantifier may be answered by either examining a varietal node (Are all moil-boxes blue?), or by = examining every mhifestation (Do a11 mail-bo~es stand at street corners?).
It should be noted that "all" requires that the predicacron be true only at some time, e.g., All people die; it does not require continuity in time, e .g., All birds have wings.
Thus untiversal quantification is also true if the predication is found for a manffestation of the varietal node, os is found for every instance of the concept.
Processes in the Network -The model for knowledge described above is only part of a system to model cognitive behavior.
Thought is simulated by processing knowledge.
Different aspects of behavior correspond to different processes, but with one and the same encyclopedia common to all.
A system for discourse analysis requires processes that use the encyclopedia to find patterns of organization in a discourse.
It would be possible to describe solely the requirements of discourse analysis, but greater overall insight is garned through a preliminary general examination and classification of cognitive processes.
Once this is accomplished, discourse analy4s is seen not to be a unique process but as composed of more basic general ones.
Simulation of many asp'ec ts of cognitive behavior can he porfomed by complexes of these general processes: discourse analysis is just an6 such complex Processes can be classified in various ways: functionally, by complexity, or by the class of relation involved.
The ftlnction of some processes is external; they deal with input and output.
Some internal processes find relations between new information and knowledge already in the encycloppdia, others investigate the va1idi.t~ of new knowledge, etc.
Processes are of two type oE complexity, either path-tracini or pattern-*.
The dichdtomy is justified by showing that there are tasks that can only be done by pattern-matching* This topic i.s considered in detail later.
Of the infinite number of possible ordered sets of arcs, only some define significant paths in the network.
An example of a relevant set of arcs is the arcs of a paradigmatic path; this defines possible inheritances.
Other significant sets are causal chains, whi-ch are represented by a string of cause arcs between modalities.
Th~s suggests that processes that use tile same kind of relati,ons or identical relations are significant.
A functronal classification of processes does nqt give a deeper understanding of3 cognitive processes.
However, classification by complexity and by kind of arc is revealing.
Path-tracing and patternmatching differ in power.
For the tormer, subpaths can be defined by the kind of arc found in the subpath.
Henceforth processes in the network wilt be described according as they are path-tracers or pattern-matchers.
Path-tracing Path-tracing processes try to establish paths between nodes along arcs of the network.
Quillian (1969) established this methodology for semantic nets.
A particularly common type of path is the paradigmatic path.
In rigure 3 there is a paradigmatic path betweqn "Ford (as President)" and "thing", but not between "rock" and "soul".
The definition of a paradigmatic path is valid for entities, events, and attributes.
Any paradigmatic path in the network will conform to the structure sl~own in Flgure 11 where * indicates any number of occurrences including zero of the marked relation.
Figure 11 Paradigmatic paths The structure follows directly from the iterativity of variety, manifestation, and typical arcs and their posbible relative orien ta~ tions.
Strings of arc labels representing paths throwh the tree are obviously regular expressions, Lee, the strings are sentences of a type 3 language* Paradigmatic path-tracing can thus be characterized by a finite sVate automaton (Hopcroft & Ullman, 1969).
Any process that can he characterized by a finite state automaton is formally termed a path-tracing prwess in the system* One such process is testing the applicability of an attribute to an entity, e .go, whether "fresh fish" or "round smoke" is acceptable when the relationship is not explicitly in the encyclopedia . Assuming the named entry points to the encyclopedia are at vari-ety or instance nodes, an entity F1 (e.g., horse) can inherit properties from an entity C2 (e.g., animal) if there is a path between F1 and T2 of the form (I-) iiihR*, where indicates a relation that is the converse of X and ) ind~cate an optional arc.
Properties may be attached to E2 either directly ar with typical and/or manifestation arcs, ime., the path from Cp to the node F3 in the representation of the property has the form TYP* MAN*.
Thus the path from El to Eg has the form (m) WR* TYP* MAN*.
Analogously, an attribute Al can apply to an entlty if there is a similar path to an attribute that :is encoded as applying to the entity.
Thus if there is a path (8) '<El > (ET) KW TYP* MAN* GE IIAN* TYP* VAK* (IST) [Al I then A, can feasibly apply to El.
That is to say, the explicit encoding of "emotional animal" would make it reasonable to infer "sad horse".
The path (8) is composed of paradigmatic patjis linked by a single application arc.
Each segment is a regular expression.
As type 3 languages are closed under concatenation (Hopcroft & Ullman, 1969, theorem 3.8), it EollowS that (8) is also a regular expression and that attribute gpplicability testin8 is a path-tracing process.
* Propositions in a discourse should be consistent wit11 encyclopedic knowledge.
Consistency is established by finding a proposition in the encyclopedia that is a generalization of the discourse proposition, e.g., given the discourse proposition (9) Harv gobbled the caviar.
and finding the generalization (10) People eat food.
A novel statement, e .g., "fiarry munched the spider", which is not consistent with (10) (assuming "spider" is not a variety of "food"), would evoke a demand for further explanation, or similar.
Consistency judgment can be formulated as a complex of path-tracing processes.
In t 8 the network form of (9), "Marv" is the agent and caviar" is the objective of "gobble1'.
Flgute 12 encodes (10).
Figure 12 Consistency j udgment The words in the discourse proposition provide entry points into the network of Figure 12 through the dictionary and converse name relations* From "gobble", node 1, paths along paradigmatic arcs are traversed tio locate nodes from which "gobble" could inherit properties, It eeg., node 2.
Kext from the entries for "tlarv" (A), and caviar", (B), analogous paths are followed, reaching C and D, respectively (among other nodes).
From C and TI arcs corresponding to the participatory relations of "Marv" and of "caviar" to "gobble", i.e., agent and objective, respectively, are followed.
If all paths intersect at a single node, e .go, node 2, then the proposition containing the intersection is the general proposition sought.
Each path from an entry point to an intersection can be characterized by a regular expression.
There are only four case relations, which sets a finite upper bound to the number of paths to be followed.
Hence this process is also a path-tracine proceqs.
Lbcatlng existing knbwledge, propositions that are already explicitly in the encyclopedia, is effectively identical to the consistency testing process above, but with downward paradigmatic paths being followed instead of upward ones.
Thus given "Oswald assassinated Kennedy" and the network of Figure 13, < Oswald > 'I 8 Oswald Kennedy ate Figure 13 Finding known propositions paths can be traced from node 1 to node 2, from node A to node B to node 2, and from node C to node D to node 2.
The common intersection IS in the known proposition.
Pat tern-Ma tchlng Pattern-atching is used in processes where two configurations of nodes and arcs must match.
me such process is with metalingually defined terms If a discourse conf lguration matches a metalingual definition, then the part of the discourse so matched may be replaced by the term.
Figure 14 contains representations of (a) "Fred ate some 11 cake that made him sick" and (b) the definition of poisonf': 11 Someone ingests somethin8 that makes him ill".
(a) (b) Figure 14 Pattern-matching I I If the latter matches the former, then poison" describes the discourse situation.
Earlies a path-tracing process was used to establish consistency between a general and a specific proposition.
The same process can be used to pair propositions or the discourse and the definition.
However, there is an aspect of complexes of propositions that prevents path-tracing from being a complete solution.
If the complex contains coreferential items, as "poison" does, this coreferentiality must be examined; if it were not errors could result.
For example, consider a discourse containing "John's eating the worms made Fred sick".
Each proposition matches phrt of the definition of "poison", but it should not be taken as an act of poisoning.
The coreferentiality condition plevents a match.
As, in general, there can he any number of coreferential participants in a complex of propositions, it is not possible to define a regular expression ta characterize the coreferentiality test.
This can be shown by considering a definition of an abstract term that contains n coreferential concepts.
There is in general no bound on dss the definition can contain any number of propositions.
If a complex of discourse propositions is to match the def initton then there must first be a unique correspond tng proposition in the definition for each discourse proposition.
This can be done using the path-tracing process described above.
But over and beyond this, the coreference condition must be satistted . For each manifestation of the coreferential concept in the definition there must be a corresponding manifestatim of one and always the same concept in the discourse . Also the syntagmatic role of corresponding manifestations in their respective propositions mwt be the same* The acceptance condition involves pair-wise counting.
This is equivalent to accepting n n strings of the form a b, which are not sentences in a type 3 language (Hopcroft & Ullman, 1969).
This demonstrates that processes that compare complexes of propositions containing coref eren tial items are not, in general, path-trac~hg processes.
-3 9A process charac terired by a device more powerful than a finite ?utomrrton is formally designhted a pattern-hatching process.
Paraphrasing discourse usinp metalingunlly def ineri terms is another sattern-matching process* lfatalinaual definitions can be recursively embedded.
For example, "buy1' may be defined in terms of "pive", which in turd may be defined in tens of "have".
Recursion is not a property of regular languages, hence this process is not 3 pathtracing plocesse Matching discourse con£ igurations against definitions, called abstraction, is an extension of the process that substantiates discourse propositions by seeking generali zed proposi tions in the encyclopedia, discussed earlier* The components of a definition are generalized propositions and hence the substantiation process will find them if they correspond to part of the discourse.
Schematically, two discourse propositions DP, and DP1, may match generalized propositions rP1 and CP2 an$ GP3, G$, and CP5, respectively, as shown in Figure 15.
MLD DEFINITION GENERALIZED PROPOSITIONS DISCOURSE PROPOSITIONS DP1 DP2 Figure 15 Abstracti-on This is the normal output when judging consistency.
Propositions of a definition are under a conjoining modality, to which the metalingual arc points.
If it is found that Some af the general propositions are part of definitions, Lea, CP2 and GP3 in MLD, then these definitions are examined to see if all the conditions for their use are satisfied, *i.e., coreference and contextual (e.g., cause arcs) conditions.
For example, in llpoison", Figure 14, the coreference of the agent of "eat" and the applicand of "ill".
If a definition is satisfied, tKen the part of the a iscourse matching the definiens can be paraphrased.
The definitional nets so far presented are not adequate for paraphrasing, but must be augmented 40 include the roles of entities of the definiens with respect to the definiendum.
This is done with manifestation arcs.
A network definition of "buy" (in "A buys thing from B for money1') is given in Figure 16.
The verbalization is "A gives money to B and B gives thing to A".
Figure 16 Role correspondence The manifestation arcs indicate the role correspondences between "buy" and the defining situation as well as coreferentialities within the latter.
The case correspondences are essential information for the prot ess of abstraction and for its inverse, decomposition, which produces a less abstract description from a network containing a term that has a metalingual definition.
For example, given the sentence "John bought a bicycle from Jane", the definition of Figure 16 enables the paraphrase "Jane gave a bicycle to John and John gave money to Jane" to be generated.
"Money" was unexpressed in the original, but is present in the definition, and appears in the paraphrase.
The process fills empty slots by the appropriate concept from the definition, in this case 1) money".
The agent, experiencer, and objective slots are filled in the source statement and are transferred to the paraphrase.
Another abstract term can point to the same definitional network, say "sell" in the case of Figure 16.
The net then has all the informa<ion for paraphrases between the two abstract terms as well as for decomposition and abstraction* There is no productive relationship between the roles of the same participant at different Levels of abstraction.
Case relations represent only the causal/animate perception of participation in an event.
More detailed descriptions of the roles of participants can only be If given in context.
For example, money" is perceived as instrumental in "buytt, but at the next level of decomposition, it is in an objectiue role in "give".
The outputs of both abstractton and decomposition are structurally indistinguishable from any other proposition in the encyclopedia and therefore can again be subject to either of the processes.
As patternmatching is a recursive process this ability for output of the process to be accepted as input is essential.
The distinction between path-tracing and pattern-matching processes may be psychologically significant Inhelder and Piaget (1 964) find that prepuberty children cannot use logical equations such as -(A AB) 3 -A V -Be The equations involve cgreference and hence their application requires a pattern-matching process . It could be speculated that this more powerful process only appear& at maturation.
DISCOURSE ANALYS IS The Structure of Coherent Discourse In this section the hypothesrs concerning the kinds of organization present in coherent discourse is outlined.
A fuller description can be found elsewhere (Phillips, 1975).
The role of the encyclopedia in discourse is then exemplified.
A discourse is judged coherent if its constituent propositions are connected . Various types of cohesive links are observed in discourse : anaphoric, spatial, temporal, causal, and thematic.
I will formally describe the structure of a well-formed discourse in terms of these connect vesL Anaphora A discourse has reference to objects.
Coherence is given by repetition of the reference.
Two kinds of anaphora can be distinguished.
The first is marked by the presence of a proform (or by repetition of the fonn): [It is usual for coherent d.lscourse to exhibit several kinds of cohe'sive links . Thus the examples invariably contain more than the one specifically being illustrated.
] (10) Henry travels too much.
He is getting a foreign accent.
Antecedents may bm nominal, verbal, or clausal . The second kind of anaphore has a dependent that is an abstract term for the antecedent.
for example I1 (11) John put the car into reverse" instead of "drive".
The mistake cost him $300 to repair.
"Plistake" in (11) is an abstract characterization of the gear selection expressed in the first sentence.
Nagao anti Tsujii (1976) address this issue.
A conventi-onal way to label the recurring characters in discourse t f is as dramatis personaetf.
Ifowever, cohesion can result not only from multiple appearances of people (lo), but of any concept, as in (11).
Spatial, Temporal, and Causal Cohesion Space, time, and cause give coherence to a set of clauses or sentence(12) The King was in the counting house, counting out his money.
The Queen was in the parlor, eating bread and honey.
The actions in (12).
are set in different rooms, but of .the same 11 palace".
(13) After Richard talked to the reporter, he went to lunch.
The temporal sequence of events in (13) is expressed by "after" . (14) John eats garlic.
Martha avoids him* To nun-aficionados garlic is known anly f.or its aroma, detection of which causes evasive '~c tion.
Cat~sc, illustrated in (14), is an important discourse connective (Schank, 1975b).
Ttle importance is perhaps ethnocentric; in other cultures different positions may have to be taken, for mcain~le.
n teleogical world view (khi te, 1975).
The causal chaYn of propositions in discourse is termed its plot structure.
Thematicity Coherent discourse is expected to have a theme, to have a topic* tor example (15) DF drowned today in IlB resevoir after restuing his son who had fallen into the water while on a fishing trip.
is a news story 6rom the New York Times with a theme that I will call t t tragedy".
In this section I wish to justify the claim that a thematic structure condition is universal by examining different exarnrles and analyses of general discourse for evidertce.
The notion of theme is much used but not often defined with clar'ity.
It is variously stated to be "The subject of discourse . . a topic1' (Oxford English Dictionary); "the playwright's point of view towards his material1' (Elabley, 1972, p.
14), etc.
In Abelson (1973) there is a list of themes (admitted to be neither fixed nor exhaustive) : admiration, devotion, appreciation, cooperation, love, alienation, betrayal, victory, dominance, rebellion, mutual antagonism, opposition, and conflict . Occasionally one finds overt comment pn the lack of a thege: "The thing that puzzled me most about The Last Remake of Beau Geste was its lack of a point of view" (Barry --Took, "cinema" pPunch, December 7, 1977) . Equally Infrequently one can find a succinct amplification of the structure of a thehe: "On the other hand, the suspension of disbelief is what thrillers are about.
It (Sheridan Horlqy, heatre re" 8Punch, November 19, 1975).
A theme may be explicitly stated in discourse.
In technical writing it is quite usual to express a complete definition, def iniendum-def iniens: Kuhn (1 962) defines "paradigm" as an "achievement" that is "sufficiently unprecedented ta attract an enduring group of adherents away from competing scientific activity [and] sufficiently open ended to leave all sorts of problems for the redefined group of practioners to resolve" (p.
10). Much of the rest of the book then discusses paradigms as models for sclen tific revolut&ons.
If a discourse has an implicit theme, it has to be inferred by the reader.
An author, therefore, should use themes that are know to the reader . One possibilty is that there is only a finite number of themes.
But lacking evidence for this positfon, I will hypothesise that the number of themes may be unlimited in the same way that the vocabulary of a language is open.
A reader may not know a word that is used by an author; in a similar fashion he may not recognize a theme.
There are studies that indicate the existence of abstract themes in language.
In folk-tales, Propp (1968) analyses a render's expectancies about the structure of the tale.
Propp starts by comparing the followin8 events from different tales: 1.
A tsar gives an eagle to a hero.
The eagle carries the hero away to another kingdom* a 2.
A princess gives Ivan a ring Young men appear'tilg from otrt of the ring carry Ivan into another kingdom.
Propp infers that "a tale often attributes identical actions to varhus personages.
This makes possible the study of the folk tale according td the functions of the dramatis personae" (pa 20).
Falk tales are analysed in terms of Eunct'ions.
The above examples are described as It con'taining two functions: "Aquisi tion of a magical agent" and Transference to a designated place".
An example of Propp s analysis is (22) ACTION A tsar, three daughters.
The daughters go walking, overstay in the garden.
A dragon kidnaps them . A call for aid.
Quest of the three heroes.
Thxee battles with the dragon.
Rescue of the mazdens.
Return. WedcFing.
FUNCTION INITIAL SITUATION AB SENTATION VIOLATION VILLAINY PlEDIATION CONSENT' TO COUNTERACTION DEPARTURF STRUGGLE VICTORY IN IT IAL MISPORTUNE LIQUIDATED RETURN WEDDING (p* 128) Functions correspond to metali,ngually defined concepts of the encyclopedia.
Propp show that thi.s genre 01 discourse can be analysed as an ordered string of abstract concepts.
-4 8Linde (1974) finds that there is a prescribed pattern in verbal descriptions of apartments.
Only two discourse strategies are used by her subjects to express the spatial structures, and of these, one is considerably more frequent than the other: There are at least two logical possibilities for . . . [the overall description of apartment layouts] . . the speaker may describe a map of the apartment.
or he may describe a tour of it.
Fxmples of each are the following: I'd say it's laid out in a huge square pattern, broken down into four units.
If you were looking down at this apartment from a height, it would be like . . . like I said before, a huge square with two lines drawn through the center to make four smaller squares.
Now on the ends . . uh . . . in the two boxes facing out on the street you have the living room and a bedroom.
In between thC?se two boxes youhavea bathroom.
Now between the next two boxes, facing the courtyard you have a small foyer and then two boxes, one of which is a bedroom and the other of which is a kitchen and a small foyer a . . . a little beyond that.
Well you walk in the door and there's a kitchen and then off the kitchen is one bedroom.
As you go straieht in from the doorway throught the kitchen you go into the living room.
And then to the left of the living room aye two bedrooms.
The two bedrooms are on the same side of the building and the living room and the kitchen are on the same side of the building.
Both of these descriptions are reasonable agsyers to the question "would you describe the lgyout of your apartment"?
Our intuition certainly informs us that both speakers have fulfilled cne task that was proposed them.
What our intuitions do not tell us is that descriptions like [the first] are extremely rare, while descriptions like [the second] are extremely common.
Of 72 apartment descriptions, only 3 are of the form of a map . . * while 69 are the form of a tour (pp, 8-9) The tour may be a composition of separate episodic events of moving between rooms of the apartment . The plan is more obviously systemic, involving spatial (left, right, e tc *) and comnonential (part-whole) organiea tion.
Longacre (1968) notes that in a given language there is a finite number of discourse types which can never be mixed or confused.
Discourse from various Philippine languages suggest four contrasting discourse prose genres: Narrative: recounts some sort of stofy Procedural: tells how to do something.
Expository: any sort of explanatory essay.
Hortatory: attempts to influence or to change conduct* Narrative discourse is composed of the following tagmemes : APERTURE provides temporal and spatial setting and introduces some of the principal dramatis personae.
CLOSURE gives final commentary on the main participants, "they lived happily ever after".
Nuclear tagmemes EPISODE, DENOUEMENT, anti ANTIDENOUEEIENT show a great variety of exponence * . typically any paragraph type may be an exponent plus embedded drscourse of the PROCEDURAL or EXPOSITORY genre.
A correspondence can be informally recognized between some of It Propp's functions and Longacre's tagmemes.
For example, between Initial Situation1' and "~~er ture", and "Reward" and losu sure".
For Propp the peak of the discourse is in the function "Initial PIisfortune Liquidated", and for Longacre it is in the tagmeme "Anti-Denouement" e The idea of a hierarkhic orkanization of tagmemes mentioned by Longacre, above, is paralleled in Lakof f's (1992) transf:ormational generative nodel that uses Propp's set of functions.
A phrase struc11 ture component generates a deep structure".
For example, the tale of (22) may be represented by the tree stxuc ture of Figure 17.
-50SITUATION REUARD S~N QUEST RESCUE CALL FOR AID RELEASE MEDIATION CW~ERDEPARTURE STRUGGLE VICTORY MI SFORTUNE RETURN WEDDING ACTION ilaimm Figure 17 Textual deep structure The conclusion is that there are prescibed patterns in all genres of discourse; I term these patterns "themes".
I do not offer a complete inventory of themes; their discovery is a matter of empirical investigation Any extended discourse is unlikely to be organized according to a single theme* I hypothesise that a coherent aiscourse is characterized by a single rooted tree of themes, as schematized in Figure 17.
All themes must be proper subthemes of the matrix theme.
A text with an overlapping thematic structure is incoherent : (23) Eating fish made John sick.
He caught measles last May* -51shown schematically in Figure 18.
John eat a Jd h n's poisoning 4' n John's illnesses John alck John he8 meaales Figure 18 Incoherent thematic structure An important point to conclude this section.
The inferred connections may not correspond with those intended by the author.
Thi~ is another problem.
Here I only address the analysis of a story by a reader.
If he connects it in the manner described above, then it is coherent for him.
The Rqle of the Encyclopedia ---Not all of discourse structure is overtly stated; discourse is highly elliptic . In (1 3) tha discourse connective "sf ter" is present to mark a temporal sequence, but in (14) there is no realizati~n of the causal relation between the two prapositions.
Normally one assumes that a discourse is coherent; hence (12) is most acceptable if the rooms are taken within the same habitation.
Evidently a reader must infer omitted structure.
The inferences are made from his cognitive store of world knowledge.
There is much discussion at present about inference as part of understanding.
To make inferences is easy; the problem is to make the right ones.
It helps to have a goal.
It is suggested that discourse can be said to have been undetstood when it has been judged coherent, as defined above.
In the next sections are presented the role of the encyclopedia in determining and representing the dimensions of coherence spelled out above.
Anaphora If the dependent is a proform then part of understanding is to determine the correct antecedent . There are syntactic constraints (Langacker, 1969) which serve to narrow down choices for antecedents and to give an order of preference.
Winograd (1971) also established an ordering for the choice of antecedents.
Nash-Webber (1976) used lambda abstraction to establish possible antecedents The chosen antecedent, when substituted for the proform, must produce a meaningful proposition that is coherent in context.
A meaningful proposition is 1 one that has a counterpart in the encyclopedia.
Wilks (1975) discusses a method of finding the most semantically acceptable antecedent.
In encycloped~c terms, the counterpart may be the self-same proposition, o?, more likely, a systemic proposition.
The process of finding such a proposition has been described earlier.
If no generalization is found, the input proposition is not consistent with encyclopedic knowledge.
Abstract terms can be defined by complexes of general propositions, each having sufficient conceptual content to define situations in which they apply.
For example, a definition of "mistake" must be such thar it applies to part of the first sentence in (11 1.
The process of abstraction needed here was presented above.
Spatial, Temporal, and Causal Cohesion To in£ er omitted spa tiotemporal and causal relations, i .e ., the discursive relations of the encyclopedia, it is also necessary to locate general propositions.
Systemic memory, of course, includes these relations.
Schematically, Figure 19, from a discourse proposition PI we can locate P2, by the means already described.
P2 may have a discursive relatlon R to another systemic proposition P3.
A proposition Pq, a particularized version of P3, and the relation R, 'between P2 and P3, can be added to the discourse.
Of ten Pq will be a proposition already stated in the discourse, then merely the relation need be inferred co augment the plot structure.
R P2 * ENCYCLOPEDIA R P1 P4 DISCOURSE Figure 19 inference of discursive structure It may may, however, be necessary to infer a chain of propositionn to link the propositions of the original discourse Intuitively there must be a limit on the number of propositions that can be inferred in a sensible path, but at present no %might can be offered.
To exemplify the process in greater detail, let us consider some of the knowledge that is used in the analysis of (15): "In water and not ah1 e to act causes drowning".
In Figure 20 the network form of this knowledge is presented.
Figure 20 Example of causal inference Prom the discourse propositions "DF in watert' and "DF cannot act", paradigmatic structure enables the systemic propositions A and B to be found.
mere is e coreferentiality condition that must be tested in the manner described earlier . The discourse propositions pass the test, so the complex represented by the modality C exists in the discourse.
Ttle discursive relation cause can be followed from C to D.
The latter is a pla~isible inference, and in fact, o specific equivolerlt of D is one of the original propositions of the discourse, i.em, "DF drom".
The concepts of the sys.temic propositions .ire linked to thcr rest of the encyclopedia by typical orLsm It is so because of the nature of the hnowledge.
is such that it is only son~ething that could happen in the given c ircun~stanc es . The indications from the testing of Thorndyke (1976) are that.
~nierences are a psychological reality in understanding natural language texts.
Thematicity In, the present system, a thematic concept is defined structurally, it is anything having a metalingual definition* 1\ theme is theretore a complex of generalized propositions.
The process of detecting the apgllcability of abstract terms, and hence of finding themes, is abstrac tion, described above.
Abstraction is a recursive process and IS thus one way to capture the embedding of themes hypothesised to exist in discourse.
The paraphrases ellcited by Pfandler, Johnson, and DeForest (1'976 and Rumelhart (1976) show that subjects do create descriptions of texts that vary in abstractness in accord with the hierarchy of themes proposed here.
IMPLEMENTATION In thiq section the imple~nentation of the structures and processes presented above is described* The original program was written in SNOBOL for a CDC6400.
In a complete system there should, of course, be a parser.
For the present this does not exist; the system only embodies the cognitive component.
This means that the overall organization is not as it would be in a complete text analysis system, where interaction between the syptac tic and semantic components is essential (Woods, 1971; Schank, 1975a; Winograd, 1971; Erdman, 1975) The justification for this ommission is that for the present I am seeking to establish only the nature of the semantic organization of a coherent discourse.
Once this structure has been identified it will provide the goal for a complete systernInput to the spcern is accordingly in a cognipive form that retains the logital ellipsis of the surface form.
Most of the processin8 is performed by "Nonnalizer" which infers omitted logical and thema~ic structure.
A judgement of coherence is then a simple task: if the discourse is not logically connected or does not have a single theme, then it is incoherent; otherwise the matrix theme indEcates the topic of the discourse.
Processes A component of all processes is a breadth first path-tracing routine, called "Ripple".
A search path is defined by a sequence of arc types A path does not explicitly state whether an arc can be repeated.
The network is assumed to be syntactically well-formed and this controls repetitions.
An arc can be marked as obligatory; otherwise it is optional.
A goal of the search can be defined.
This may be a particular node, or a node marked with a specified "activation tag", i .e., a node reached by another path, when seeking an intersection.
Paradipiatic path,-tracinq Paradigmatic path-tracing is implemented by Ripple with a path sequence VAR IST TYP MAN (see Figure 11).
A converse paradigmatic path ---is 'EfAN TYP IST VAR.
The properties associated with a varietal concept may be found by Ripple with a path TYP MAN starting from the concept.
Causal connectivity condition This process uses Ripple with cause as the path definition* It also has to include P-W arid P-W to be able to reach from and to conj unc ts.
Discovery of gener a1 and spec if ic propo si ti ons All propositions of a discourse must match general propositions in the encyclopedia.
The procedure is to make cyclic calls of Ripple.
The first is from the modality node of the discourse proposition.
Each node reached, other than the modality, initiates another search in the encyclopedia.
For example, given the discourse and encyclopedia of Figure 12, the process is as follows : from "gobblef' node 1, a converse paradigmatic path plus a typical arc plus manifestation ia followed to, for example, node 2 in the encyclopedia.
Ripplipg from "gobble" in the If discourse gives nodes "Marv" and caviar".
The syntagmatic arcs traversed are noted.
From "Marv", node A, a converse paradigmatic path plus typical plus manifestation plus converse agent is followed, with a goal of a node activated from the prior discourse node, i ~e., "gobble".
[Not all of these arcs have to be present, they are optional except £0, tt the syntagmatic arc.] Node 2 satisfies this goal.
From caviar" node B, a converse paradigmatic path plus typical plus manifestation plus converse objective is followed with a g~al of a node activated from the prior discourse node "gobbleff* Again node 2 satisfies the goal.
Thus the proposition at 2 is a generalization of tihe discourse proposition.
The condition on an acceptable generalized match is that it must contain all the syntagmatic informirtion of the discourse proposition,; the generalizatdon may contain more information but it cannot contain less Separate searches are made for syntagmetic structure and for spa tio-temporal information on the modality of a proposition.
It is only necessary to change the path description from that used in Figure 12 from converse paradigmatic path to paradigmatic path for the routine to local e more specific propositions.
kietalingual decomposition The search for general propositions also flags nodes that have metalingual definitions.
New propositions having the structure of the definiens are made by copying the definiens but with node names drawn from the proposition that is being paraphrased These new propositions are then considered as part of the discourse.
To make the copy, the bresdth first search routine is used to pass through the definiens.
For each ode and arc in the definition, an equivalent structure is created The end of scanning a proposition of the definiens is marked by reaching a typical arc, i.e., at the point at which the definition is linked into paradigmatic organization.
If a participant in the generalized proposition matches a participant in the discourse proposition then this participant fits into the corresponding role slot in the definiendum, otherwise the concept in the definiendm is used.
For example, given "Peter buys a bicycle from Jane" and the definition of "buy" as in rigure 16.
In locating the systemic definiendm, the correspondences of "~eter" to "A", etc ., are also found.
When copying reaches the node that matched "peter", this name is inserted into the t 1 paraphrase.
There is no correspondence for the instrument, so money" 1s the inserted from the definiiendum, MetaLin~ual abstraction In searching for general propositions, some may be found that are components of metalingual definitions.
These have modalities that are pdinted to by a part-whole arc.
-60The proqess that tests coreference and contextual requirements uses Ripple to traverse in parallel the candidate discourse propositions and those of the definiens.
Typical arcs in the definiens limit the search.
Each node of the definiens is compared with equivalent nodes in the discourse propositions at each step.
A proposition is rejected if a node has no equivalent or it does not possess all the properties of the nodes of the definiens, including arcs to nodes matched in the previous step, See., if nodes x (systemic) and Y (discourse) were taken as corresponding nodes at one step, then if on the next step a node of the definition has an arc to X then the discourse must have the same arc to Ya Only those propositions that match the definiens will not have been rejected and can be rewritten using the abstrwt term.
The process can -be illustrated using the definition of "poison" given in Figure 14b, and its application to the discourse in Figure 14a.
The crux of the test is at that node of the definition having the two manifestations arcs emanating from it* If the discourse proposition did not have two manifestations it would be rejected This is how "John's eating the worms made Fred sick" is eliminated* Or if it does have two manifestations, they must point to nodes that were satisfied Qn the previous step of the comparison.
Thus if one of the manifestations pointed into another proposition the test would fail.
Inference I of omitted discursive relations A search along discursive arcs in systemic memory from counterparts of discourse propositions may lend to a proposition that is flagged as a generaliz~tion of another discourse proposl tion.
If this is so then the discusive arc may be added between the discourse propositions.
If the proposition reached is not flagged then it and the discursive arc are copied, and added to the discourse.
Ttle copying routine was given in the discussion of decomposition.
The System The flow chart of the analysts fs shown in Figure 21.
The meanings of the annotations are: OLDINFO has a discourse proposition as its argument.
It finds systemic equivalents.
It calls a routine SPACETIME to cornpare spatio-temporal contexts.
SPACETLME is also called during the search for general propositions when a non-event node is found with an attached modality.
If OLDINFO is presented with a modality that has only part-whole relations ta other nodes, it does nothing.
LOGCON has a systemic proposition as its argumfnt.
It succeeds if it finds d link to a general proposition corresponding to a proposition of the discourse (including propositions added by inference).
It also generates INTERLIST, a list of causal inferences from propositions of the discourse.
IKST is a list of nodes found to have metalingual definitions.
CONJLIST is a list of conjoined propositions.
When a discourse proposition is matched against the encyclopedia, it sees if the encycl opedic proposition is a constituent of another modality.
A CONJUNCTION TEST routine uses CONJLIST to locate discourse propositions that can be grouped.
TRANSFORM has two modes . In one it is used to decompose propositions that contain a metalingually defiries concept* A second mode c eates causally inferred propositions . / \ / I \ Y 'C / / \ / \ CONJUNCTION \ Figure 21 Flow chart of the system nNALYSIS OF SOME STORIES I want to show that abstract patterns are quite general, that all linguistic behavior is based on such patterns.
Obviously such a claim must be substantiated by the discovery of such patterns.
A number of stories of drowning were used to test this hypothesis.
The second claim of proper embedding,of themes was also tested by a more complex drowning story.
In the examples a refined hypo thesis of discourse connectedness is used.
One habit in discourse is to set the stage (kropp's "Initial Situation", ~on~acre's "Aperture").
In terms of the model thin aspect should be recognizable by the occurrence of space and time relations.
?I We find todayf', "in MB resevoir", "On October 11, 1974".
"DF of Quekns", etc.
A greater stru~tural complexity of expression is to be expected elsewhere in the stories (see Longacre's comments on nuclear tagmemes, above).
Longacre (1972) includes in the nmural outline of a discourse, recognition of a peak within the discourse.
Various surface markings for the peak are given: tense change, extra long sentences, rhetorical underlinings, etc.
Taking an ethnocentric view of the world (cf.
White's teleogical commune), it is suggested that In the underlying form, the peak will lie within causally related propositions.
It is thus expected to find the theme within the causal structure and so I focus on this organization.
This would be inappropriate if the stories were aescriptions of the kind elicited by Linde, above.
Common patterns Shart factual accounts of drowning8 were elicited from freshmen fn Linguistics and English.
The instructions given sought only to define a topic and an approleimate length: "Write a drowning story that, for example, you might expect to find as a column filler in the New York Times".
A sample is (Story 1) The body of Horatio Smith was found last night in the Niagar a River He was drowned when his boat overturned on the river . The hypothesis formed is that an acceptable drowning story must give the following information: (a) Why the victim was in the water.
(b) Why the victim was not able to save himself The rationales for these requisites are: (c) A person is not usually found in water, and therefore some explanation of this location is expected.
(d) By an instinct of self-preservation, one would expect the victim to try to extricate himself from his predicament.
The story should say why he couldn't.
Figure 22 shows the cognitive form of this requirement.
MTL @<drowning CAUSE E CAUSE 1 CAUSE Idrow act 1 <person> Figure 22 The drowning theme The empty modalities indicate that a matching story must have something that stand in a causal relationship to the other propositions, Lee, explain why they happened (what caused them) If not originally explicit, this information must be recoverable through encyclopedic knowledge.
One way in which the content of systemic memory may be substantiated is by examination of negative propositions in the stories; writers presumably only need to negate normal expectancies, and this is what generalizations are.
Unfortunately there are few negatives in the stories.
Stories 31 and 5 indicate the assumption of swimming ability.
Stories 12, 32, and 42 show that the success of rescue attempts is anticipated.
-66The stories elicited fell into several categories.
The two analysed here are a boat capsizing and a fall into water.
In spite of surface difference it will be shown that: at an abstract level the stories conforn to the thematic pattern.
The analysis of one story from each category is presented Stories not analysed include such happenings as a person eating too much then going for a swim; Jesus freaks trang to walk on water; and water-skiers having accidents while watching bikini-clad occupants of passing boats A boat capsizing -(Story 1) The body of Horatio Smith was found last night in the Niagara River He was drowned when his boat over turned in the river.
(Story 2) Eggbert Willis, 56, of Bayside, drowned this morning after the boat he was rowing overturned near Devil's Cove.
(Story 3) The body of John Smith, 58, was discovered today at the foot of West Ferry Street* He was reported missing four days ago by his wife after he failed to return from a boating trip.
HIS boat had capsized.
Death was due to drowning.
(Story 31) A small sailboat was afloat on a calm peaceful lake when suddenly the mast of the vessel struck some cables overhead and the boat capsized.
The two Inen aboard drowned, ane because he was hit by the boat and rendered unconscious, the other didn't know how to swim* Story 1 is analysed* In it, some of the causal and thematic structure is absent and is reconstructed using the following knowledge: (i) If a person is in a boat and the boat overturns, this may cause him to be injured and to be in the water.
11 (ii) If injured a person may not be able to act".
(iii) If a person is in water and cannot "act" then he may drown.
Figure 18 shows the encyclopedic form of this piece of knowledge.
-6 7The nodes appearing in the encyclopedic entries for all of these Eacts exemplified in this aection are linked to varietal nodes by typical arcs.
This is so because the Eacts qre not obligatory on some concept but are something that may happen to some examples of this category some of the time.
In the analysis of the collection of drowning stories, only the parts of the story that are relevant to the dtowning are conside'ted.
For example, in Story 1, only the second sentence is processed; the first deals with an event after the death and c~sequently is excluded.
The result of the analysis is shown in Fip;ure 23.
The original propositions of the discourse are: Boat contains Horatio Smith Boat overturns "on Niagara River.
Horatio Smith drowns.
The antecedent conditions expressed in a general form in (i) match the specific situation in Story 1.
Thus it is inferred that Moratio Smith is in the water and that he is injured.
From (if) it follows that he is not: able to act.
By being in the water and not able to act, he can drown, a fact stated explicitly in the story, as shown in Figure 23(Horatlo Smith) Figure 23 A boat capsizing hrther we have explanations for Horatio Smith being in the water: the boat he was in ovexturned; and for him not being able to act: he was in j ur ed . The theme fits.
We have a connected discourse with (trivially) a single-rooted theme; it is coherent.
The possibility that a boat over turning only puts a person into the water is added to the encyclopedia to account for part of Story 31, where it is not an injury but the inability to swim that prevents one victim from saving himself.
This has consequences for Story 1.
These two facts match the same propositions but are an exclusive conjunction.
When an complex is found that has the same constituents, as an conjunction already cow structed, the later episode is stacked and used if the current analysis path fails* In Story 1 the use of the alternative does not lead to a connected structure.
The subsequent backup then takes the correct A fall into water I-The second category of dromina story requires the addition of the knowledge that "If a person falls, he may injure himselftta Ten stories in this category are listed below.
(StoPy 5) Early titis morning, James R.
Smith, age 7, was for~nd In a swimming pool near liis hame.
Investigators say the boy stumbled into the pool in the darkness esrly this morning whilst looking for his pet kitten, Unable to swim, the boy drowned.
(Story 7) At the home of blrs.
~ohn Smith on Elmwood Avenue, a boy,.
Mark, age 15, drowned in his pool.
The boy was with two other friends.
They were performing water stunts when Mark fell and smashed his head on the bottom of the pool (Story 12) Yesterday afternoon, the life of a Buffalo youth was taken when he slipped on rocksat a local quarry.
The failure of attempted rescues resulted in the drowning of llichael Smith, age 7, of 29 Oak Street, Buffalo.
(Story 19) A 12 year-old boy was found drowned in Ellicott Creek.
Sources say the boy ran away from home and fell accidentally into the water.
(Story 26) -A l0-yea1 dd boy died last night when he fell into a smkl pond.
His friends say he was chasing his parakeet which had escaped from its cage, when the incident occurred.
(Story 32)Steve Smith, of Hickstown, drowned today while sailing on Glasslyke Eake.
EIr . Smith, who was knockedoverboard when struck * on the head by 8 seagull, perished,before help could reach him.
His son Edgar's attempts to save his life proved futile.
(Story 37) hn unidentified man was seen by several persons fa;lingsinto the Niagara River at the foot oE Ferry Street.
He was later pulled from the water and pronounced dead at the scene.
The cause of death was drowning.
(Story 38) Today, the world's greatest swimmer died.
John Whale was preparing to take a bath when he tripped and fell into the bath Cause of death was# drowning.
-70(Story 40) On October llth, 1974, an unidentified man drowned in his bathtub at the Hotel Sheraton* The drowning was due to the fact that h6 fell into the tub in trying to make himself sobet.
(Story 42) An 11 year-old boy drowned today after falling into the canal where he and his friends were playing.
The two other boys, both eleven, tried to save their companion but were unable to do so* (Story 4) A body was found early yesterday at the foot of the Mango River, near Clubsport* The body is believed to be that of Jose Gepasto.
It seems as if Mr Gepaeto's car made a wrong turn on the highway and plunged into the water Story 4 is analysed* Note that it does not explicitly mention the motion of the person, only that of the car.
Understanding the story requires that it be known that: (h) If a person is "contained" by something that falls, then he also falls.
(b) If a person is "contained" by something that is in contact with something (emgm, water), then the person is in contact with the something (water) too.
(But not if the something is a submariner) Further it is not given that Jose Gepasto drowns.
This can be inferred, but the inference chain is open ended.
The analysis continued making causal inferefices and conjunctive groupings, some of which led to the discovery of the theme* Only when the system ran out of logical and conjunctive possibilities, did it make the ccannec tedness test.
Figure 24 shows the network developed in the analysis<car> Figure 24 A fall into water Embedded themes Story 22, in fact taken from the New York Times, looks like a drowning story, and as shall be shown, does contain this theme.
However, it contains more.
The claim i"s made that it is a "tragedyt'.
(Story 22) DF, 43 years old, of Queens, drowned today in MB resevoir after rescuing his son D, who had fal,lem into the water while on a fishing trip at TF, near here, the police said.
This theme is defined in Figure 6 as a situation in which "Someane does a good act [e.g., rescue) and dies (e.g., drowns)".
It will be seen that the tragedy is a proper sub theme of the drowning theme.
Thus, though the story may be edid to have two themes, one is part of the other, and by our hypothesis, the discourse is still coherent.
At each step the encyclopedic knowledge used in the inference and an outline of the inferred nodes are indicated Figure 25 shows an outline of the evolved atruc ture, where the original discourse propositions are shown by and inferfed proposi tiona by 0.
Father not able to act 1 Sc I fall Son injured Son not able to act Figure 25 Embedbd themes Step 0.
Intial state.
(8odes 1, 2, 3, 4).
Step 1.
Fall causes injury.
(Node 5).
Step 2.
Injury causes inability to act . (Node 6) . Step 3.
In water and not able to acr: causes fescue.
(Node 7 and a link to node 3).
Step 4.
To rescue someone who is in the water, get into the water.
(Nodes 8, 9) Step 5.
Acting causes weariness.
(Node 10).
Step 6.
Weariness causes inability to act.
(Node 11).
Step 7.
In water and not able to act causes drowning.
(Node 12 and a link to node 4).
Note that the antcedent condition in Step 3 is the same as in Step 7.
Both resultant situations are possible and are noted The system can select either.
However, the wrong choice does not lead to a connected structure and backup to the alternative has to be made.
After Step 7 the discourse has an inferred caugal structure connec ting all the original propositions.
The theme "tragedy" fits, the rescue is a (partial) cause of the demisem Rescue is a variety of act and good can apply to it and Brown is a variety of die.
The drowning theme is also present.
Although the drowning theme is not defined in terms of the tragedy, it can be seen that one is properly embedded in the other.
The Process that performed the analysis is at present incomplete because the notion of embedding is nQt well understood for the highly structured network.
The process used the transitivity of cause and the conj oining of propositions . Thus Che tragedy encompasses propositions 3, 10, 11, and 4 and the drowning 8, 9, 10, 11, and 4.
The transitivity of cause lets the chain 3, 10, 11 be equivalent to the chain 10 and 11.
A postmorrem on this example reveals a serious flaw.
As can be seen the rescue is the cause of the father being in the water The analysis has failed to dietinguish desire for an action, a goal, from the execution of the action.
A more satisfying analysis would include some of the mechanisms to be found in the robot planner of Furugori C4975).
Step 2 should be seen as setting up the conditions for the son to drown, which is an event that should be prevented.
This provides a goal for the subsequent activities . One way to prevent someone from drowning is to save him, this is a subgoal that would directly achieve the goal.
If you want to rescue someone who is in the water, then it may be necessary to get into the water.
With this subgoal included, the goal can be achieved, and the analysis resumes at Step 5.
Figure 26 shows this preferred analysis of this fragment of the story.
This would not c'hange the relative status of the themes.
Son In Son not water Father res drown Father save son \ +$*# b father son Figure 26 Improved story analysis DISCUSSION Much of the representative power of the encyclopedia is unused in the system for discourse analysis and therefore remains to to be tested and evaluated fiere is dlso not at present a parsing system to effect transduction from surface to encyclopedic form.
The methodology is first to try to establish an adequate conceptual representation which provides a goal for a complete system.
Although one example demonstrated the embedding of themes, it did not exhibit recursive abstraction.
Further examination of themes in discourse should overcome this.
There are two aspects of the encyclopedia, paradigmatic and metalingual organization, that set this model apart from any other current system.
Discussion will be directed to comparative comments on these aspects It is evident that the present sytem makes much use of parsdigmatic organization.
Pet Skhank (1975a) seeks to minimize the need for this kind of knowledge.
His conlrlusion arises from the observation that people do not make responses based on paradigmatic associations, but rather on eplsodic associations.
This is not telling evldence against the existence of such structure, rather it may say something about the cognitive process of free association.
In Schank's system there is no need for paraddgms at the level of conceptual representation as words are transformed into conceptual primitives by the conceptual parser* The parser thus contains knowledge that is functionally equivalent to paradigmatic structure* -75The question then to ask is whether having a single level af representation of concepts, the primitives, is the most beneficial for conceptual processing.
I would claim not for two reasons* Firstly there is tb presence of thematic structure in discourse Metalingual organization enables the content of a text to be thematically deacribed at many levels of precisenesse It is possible to be quite superficial, or by decomposition to become more and more detailed, or vice-versa using abstraction.
The depth of analysis can be determined by the requirements of understanding a given text: essentially abstracting or decomposing until causal links are established over the text.
It 3s not apparent that definitions of themes can be controlled in Conceptual Dependency Theory, in that if stated in terms of primitives, each abstract term could become extremelv large.
In contrast, the encylopedia can define themes in terms bf lesser themes.
Secondly paradigmatic structure enables comparatively small chunks of knowledge, say involving a single causal relation, to be retrieved and pieced together to complete the underlying form of discourse.
Rather then attempting to patch general knowledge, Schank and Abelson (1 975 ) have introduced "Scripts", large preformed knowledge structures Wose function is to limit the possible inferences in understanding* This has a danger of essentially idiomatizing understanding, with a consequent difficulty in handling deviant situations And as Wilks (1976) points out, one problem with Scripte is that they are invoked $n their entiaety by word association.
Thus it is suggested that, for example, "I bought some beer from the supermarket, drove home, and drank it while watching a football game on television" would evoke multitude of Scripts by the presence of such ~rds as "supermarket", "drive", "football", etc Heace the desired reduction of possible in£ erencea is not achieved.
Paradigmatic organization enables recognition of higher level structures, including proposittans that are part of metalingually defined concepts.
Partially recogn~zed abstract terms cgn be used t~ predict their completion.
The encyclopedia thus has general, productive bottom-up and top-down capabilities.
Even though an abstract definition should be activated by the appearance of an appropriate word in the text, the structure will not in general be large, and so not produce an overhelming number of extraneous active nodes . On the other hand it is certainly advantageous to have a multitude of overt themes in analysing discourse Searches can be Initiated from these terms as well as from the more specific discourse propositions.
To illustrate this, consider an exhaustive undirected search for a goal n states distaht in a space where each state is linked to m other states.
The number of nodes activated will be of the order m**n.
If the goal is known then a bidirectional search will reduce the exponent to n/2.
But a laore significant reduction takes place if there are stated intermediate subgoals, i.e., themes in the hierarchy, say g af them, with an average separation of n/g, the exponent becomes n/(2g) ACKNOWLCDGEMENTS I would like to thank David Hays for his continual support and guidance throughout this work.
Ray Bennett and Randy Walser helped in trying to make this discourse coherent, the faults that remain are mine.
REFERENCES Abelson, R.
P. The structure of belief systems.
In R.
C. Schank & K.
M. Colby (Eds-), Computer Models of Thought an Language.
San Francisco: W* H.
Freeman, 19/3.
Abelson, R.
Po Concepts for representing mundane reality i.n plans.
In DO G.
Bobrow & A.
Collins (Eds.), Representati.on and Understanding.
Studios in Cognluve Science.
New York: Academic Press, 1975.
Berlin, Ba, Breedlove, DO Em, & Raven, P.
W. Covert categories in folk taxonomies.
American Anthr~pologist, 1968, 70, 290-299.
Black, F1 A deductive question-answering system.
In Me Minsky (Ed ))., Semantic Information Processinq.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1968.
Bubrow, D.
GO Natural language input for a computer problem-solving system.
In M.
Minsky (Ed ))., Semantic Information Processin&.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1968.
Ch~msky, N.
Aspec tg -of a Theory of Syntax.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1965.
Colby, KO M.
Simulation of belief systems.
In R.
C. Schank & K.
M. Colby (Eds.), Computer Models of Thouand Language.
San Rancicrcd: We H.
Freeman, 1973.
Collins, A*, & Quillian, MI Re How to make a language user.
In E.
Tulving & W.
Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of Memory.
New York: Academic Press, 1972.
Conklin, H.
C. Lexigraphical treatment 06 folk taxonomies.
In F.
W. Householder & S.
Saporta (Eds 0), Problems in Lexicography (Publication No.
21) Blooming ton: Indiana Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics, 1962.
Erdman, L.
D. Overview -of the Hearsay speech understanding research (Computer Sciences Review 1974-1 975) . Pittsburgh : Carnegie-Mellon University, 1975.
Fillmore, C.
Jo Toward a modern theory of case.
In D.
A. Reibel & S.
A. Schane (Eds.), Nodern Studies in English: Readings in Transf onnational Grammar.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Ha11, 1969.
Furugari, T.
A memory model and simulation of memory processes for driving -a ear (Technical Report No.
77). Buffalo: State University of New York, Department of Computer Science, 1975.
Hallfday, M.
A. KO, & Hasan, R.
Cohesion in English.
Lopdon: Longman, 1975.
Hays. Do G.
Linguistic foundations for a theory of content analysis.
In GO Gertner, B.
0. Ro Holsti, K.
kippendoff, W.
30 Paiaely, & P.
Jo Stone (Eds.), The Analysis of Communication Content.
New York: Wiley, 1969.
(a) Nays, Do Go Applied Computational Linguistics.
In GI E.
Perren & J.
L. Trim (Eds ))., Applications of Linguistics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969.
(b) Hays, Do GO Linguistic problems of denotation.
In M.
BForwischC K.
Ec Heidolph (Eds.), Progreps in Linguistics.
The Hague: Mouton, 19700 Hays, D.
C. Vpes of processes on ~ognitive networks Paper presented at the International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Pisa, Italy, 1973.
Hays, D.
GO Cognitive Structures.
Book in preparation, 1978.
Hendrix, C.
C. Expanding the utility of semantic networks throwh, partitioning.
Menlo Park, CA: Stanford Research Institute, 1975.
Hopcroft, J.
E., & Ullman, J.
DO Fofmal Ladguages and their Relation to Automata.
Reading, MA: Addlson-wesley, 1YbY.
Inheldet, Be, & Piaget, J.
The Earlv Growth of Logic in the child.
New York: W.
We Norton, 1964.
Klein, So, Oakley, J.
Da, Suurballe, Do J., & Ziesemer, Re A.
A program for generating reports on the status and history of stochastically modifiable semantic models of arbitrary universes Statistical Methods in Linguistics, 1972, 8, 64-93.
Kuhn, T.
S. The Structure of Scientif id Revolutions.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962.
Lakoff, G.
Structural complexity in fairy tales.
The Study of -s Msn 1972, 1, 128-150.
Langacker, R.
On pronominalization and the cha'ln of command.
In D.
A, Reibel & S.
A. Schane (Eds.), Elolern Studies in English: Readin= in Transformational Grammar.
Englewood Clifts, N3: Prentice-Hall, 1969.
Linde, C.
-. The linguistic encoding of spatial information.
Unpublished doctoral bisserta tion, Columbia University, 1974.
Longacre, R.
Discourse, Paragraph, and Sentence Structure _in Selected Philippine Languages San ta Ana, CA: Summer Institute of Linguistics, 1968.
Longacre, Re Hierarchy and Universality of Discourse Constituents in New Guinea Languages.
Washington, D.
C. : Georgetown University Press, 1972.
Mabley, E.
Drarilatic Construction.
Philadelphia: Chilton, 1972.
Mandler, Jq M..
Johnson, N.
S., & DeForest, M.
A structural analysis of stories and their recall: From "Once upon 2 time" to "Happily ever after" (Technical Report No.
57). La Jolla: Center for Human Information Processing, University of California at San Diego, 1976.
Nagao, Ma, & Tsujii, J.
Analysis of Japanese sentences.
American Journal of Computational Linguistics, 1976, Microfiche 41.
Nash-Webber, IS: L.
Semantic interpretation revtsited (Technical Report NO.
3335) . Cambridge: Bolt, Beranek, & Neman, 1976.
Phillips, B.
Topic analysis.
Unpublished doc tore1 dissertation, State Universit,y of New Yqrk at Buffalo, 1975.
Propp, V, Morphology -of the Folktale.
Austin: The University of Texas Press, 1968.
Putnam, No The meaning of "meaningw* Mind Language, and Reality< Philosophica< Papers (Vol . 2).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
Quillian, M.
R. The teachable language comprehender.
-Cornme ACM, 1969, 12, 459-475.
Raphael, B.
SIR: Semantic information retrieval.
In Mo Minsky (Ed ))., Semantic Information Processinq.
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1968.
Raven, Po He, Berlin, Bo, & Breedlwe, Dm E.
The origins of taxonomy.
Science, 1971, 174, 1210-1213.
Rumelhart, D.
Em, Lindsay, P.
He, & Norman, Do A.
A process model for long term memory.
In E.
Tulviog 8 Yo Donaldson ((Eds)., Organization and Memory.
New York: Academic Press, 1972.
Rumelhart, D.
E., 8 Ortony, A.
The representation of knowledge in memory (Technical Report No.
55). La 3olla:'Center for Human Information Processing, University of California at San Diego, 1976.
Rumelhart, Do E.
Understandinq and summarizing brief stories (Techflical Report No.
58). La Jolla: Center for Human Information Processink, University of California at San Diego, 1976.
Schank, R.
C. Conceptual Information Processinq.
Amsterdam: NorthHolland, 1975.
(a) Schank, R.
C. The structure of episodes in memory.
In I).
G. Bobmw & A.
Collins (Eds.), Repreeentation and Understandinq: Studies & Cognitive Science.
New Y~rk: Academic Press, 1975.
(b) Schank, Re C., h Abelson, R.
P. Scrlpts, plan?, and kncwled~.
Paper presented at the Fourth International.
Joint Conference on 4r tif ic ial Intelligence, Tbilisi, USSR, 1975.
Schubert, 1;.
K. Extending the expressive power of semantic networks.
Artificial Intelligence, 1976 7, 163-198.
Shapiro, S.
C. The MIND system: A data structure for semantic information processing (Report R-83 7-PR ) . San ta ilonica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1971.
Simmons, Re F.
Some semantic structures for representing En~lish meanings (Technical Report NL-1) . Austin : Computer-Aided Instruction Ltrboratory, The University of Texas, 1970.
Sondheimer, N.
K. Spatial reference and semantic nets.
Americlan ~ournai of Co~nputational Linguistics, 1977, Microfiche 71.
Thomnclyke, P.
W. The role of inferences in discourse comprehension.
Journal of Verbal Learninq and Verbal Behavior, 1976, 15, 437446.
Tulving, E.
Episodic and semantic memory.
In E.
Tulving & W.
Donaldson (Eds ))., Organization of Memory.
New York: Academic Press, 1972.
White, M.
Abstract definition,& the cognitive network: The metaphysical terminology of ..... a contemporary millenarian community.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, State University of New Yark at Buffalo, 1975.
Wilks, Y.
Grammar, Meaning 9.and the Machine Analysis of Language London: Routledge, 1972.
Wilks, Ye A prefential, pattern-seeking, semantics for Natural Language inference.
Artificial Intelligence, 1975, 6, 53-74.
Wilks Yb Frames, scripts, stories, and fantasies.
Paper presented at the International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Ottawa, Canada, 1976 . Winogfad, T.
Procedures -as a representation ---for data in a computer: proaram for under standdnq natural language (Repart MAC-TR-84) . Cambridge: Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, 1971.
Woods, WY A.
What s in a link: Foundations for semantic networks.
In Dm G.
Bobrow 6 A.
Collins ((Eds)., Representation and Understanding: Studdes in Cognitive Science.
New York: Academic Press, 1975 .

