American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 38 V~nn PARADIGMS FOR SENTENCE RECOGNITION MARIANNE CELCE-MURCIA DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LOS ANGELES 90024 Co~yr: yht 1976 by the,->ssocja tion for Computational ~inguistics Summary of "Verb Paradigms for Sentence Rccognit.lonff by Piqrinnnc Cclcc-Murcio Department of English, UCL4 This paper dascribcs a linguisticnlly-based recognition grammar modcl, which was dcvdlopcd as part of a Co~up~~tl.tc~-r\iJcd Ins tructinn Project, to the tasks cf recognizing and anolyzin~ n variety of basic sentence types in English.
Ways of estending the model to the analysis of comples sentences are also suggested.
The procedures and the model described herein are original; however, tjhey owe much tb insights found in the work of tws linguis ts, Grub,er and Fillmore.
The general problem of grammar recognition is that of going from a surface string of words rn a deep rcprcscntation that permits semantic interprcta8ion.
PIorc specifically, our grammar recognition procedure depends on thc identlfica tion of the ~recise function or semantic role that each noun phrase actant occurring in a given sentence exhibits with respect tcp the verb of that sentence.
By assigning verbs--or, to be more precise, verb, senses-to one or more paradigms (, perceptually and functionally defined surf ace con£ igurations), it becomes possible to determine algorithmically for every sentence the functional relation (e.
g., theme, causal actant, goal, source, locus) that each noun phrase in the sentence bears to the verb, thereby assisting greatly Ln arriving at a representation of the mearring of each sentence.
A nuhber of verb paradigms such ae intrans Ltive, transitive and ergative Rre defined.
Verbs belonging to the intransitive paradigm such a8 die, fall, go, etc.
always have subjects that function ae t%emes.
Verbs belonging to the transitive paradigm such ae kill, read, -S eat etc.
have subjects that function as causal actants -.
and objects that function as themes.
The ergative paradigm, which is more complex, cons Fs ts of change-of -state verbs such as open, melt, increase, etc.
If an ergative paradigm verb has both a subject andan object, the subject is a causal actant and the object is a theme; however; if such a verb takes only a subject, then the subject functions as a theme.
The paradigm membership of each verb sense in the data base is determined and is recorded as a lexical feature of that verb.
The number o+ verb paradigms would,proliferate almost indefinitely were it not for several devices, built into the grammar.
One of these devices is the reversal of transformations such as passive and interrogative so that subject and object functional relations remain the same as in active, declarative sentences Another such device is the recovery of noun phrase dssations such as the one occurring in a sentence likel"John ate.
" In this case, an indefinite object is reco~structed and the traneitive paradigm feature of the verb eat remains intact.
A third device of thie nature is use of a notion called incorpor; ation.
For exardple, a sentence srtch as "It is raining".
will be analyzed as having incorporated the theme subject rain' into 4 the verb with the result that a abstract structure resembling "Rain is falling" gets rec80nstructcd and processed as an intransitive verb paradigm item.
To overview the entire procedure, we start by parping the sprface structure of any given sentence.
The major constituents a,nd parts ofi speech are identified.
Nokt, we determine the type nf sentence involved (, declarative, interrogative, imperative) and transform the wrd order where necessary.
Following that the form QE the verb (ie voice and tense) is identified and again the word order is transformed if need be.
A surface role (i*.
e., subject, object) is then assigned to each noun phrase not preceded by a preposition.
At this time the lexical entry of the verb is consulted for features of movement, deletion, incorgoratlon, etc.
so that any necessary final adjustments can be made.
The paradigm me~ibership of the verb is then identified thereby permitting a predetermined heutis tic to assign a relation (Le., theme, causal actant, locative, etc).
Eo every noun phrase in the sentence.
Finally, by applying the above information as well as other lexical.
and grammatical information the surface structure is transformed ihto an appropriate abstract structure that permi ts setuantic interpretation TABLE OF CONTENTS Preface ..............mm....m..mm.............m......
Paw 6 Surface Subjects.
Surface Objects and Marked vs . Unmarked Noun Phrases ............ ..Page 10 .........
Functional Relations: Elementary and Derived Page 1.3 ..............
Classification of Verbs into Paradigms Page 20 Paradigms and Transformations ....m...mm.m...mm......
Page 30 Paradigms and Aspect ............................ ....
Pa 41 Paradigms and Incorporation .........................
Page 48 Frm Surf ace S truc ture to Deep Functional Structure .................a.mm *Page 53 ........
Extension 8f the System to Complex Sentences Page 57 Concluding Statement ....m..........m......mm....m... a 63 References ........................m.............mm.
Page 67 6 Verb Paradigms for Sentence Recognition* Preface For a number of years in the early 1970's the U.S.
Air Force sponsored research at System Developmefit Corporation in the applicati~n of natural language processing techniques to computer-aided ins truc ti~p (CAI) . The purpose of this research was to increme the overall effectiveness of CAI as an instructional method, with particular emphasis on extending the s tudent computer interface to permit s tudent-generated f tee f om responses and queries.
The research included experiments with a deductive question-answering system designed for use in CAI, the modeling of the behavior of a hypothetical tutzor, and lastly the computer evaluation of constructed student responses, and a question-answering system driven by a dynamic model of the CAI lesson content.
The subject matter used in the project was intreductory meteorology--specifically concepts relating t.0 the nature of psecipitation.
*A slightly shorter version of this paper originally appeared in April, 1972, ag one of several reports generated under Contract F33615-70-C-1726, which the Hwn Resources Laboratory of the U.S.
Air Force entered into with System Development Corporatioh, Santa Monica, California.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the U.S Air Force or the Department of Defense.
7 One
of the goals oP this C~mputer-Aided Instruction Project was the development of an efficient ~ecognitian grammar that is as a imple and rcalis tic as possible without s'tlcrif icing in'for mation critical to semantic interpretation The primqry purpose of this grammar was the analysis of student responges phrased in natural Englisha necessary step in the answer-evaluation process.
This paper describes in a general way the grammar recognition model deve1ope.d as part of the CAI Project.
The model developed was based on the assumption that recognition grammars should be constructed quite differently 0-om production grammars (e., they are something other than mere inverse algorithms of pr.oduction grawars and involve certain questions of heuristics that are not a£ concern in the constaction of production grammars); therefore an attempt was made to develop a unique model specif ical ly oriented to recognition tasks.
1 ~.
. . . ....
. . l~h~ author is not a computer programmer but an applied linguist, who collaborated on a grammar recogni't ion model for the c~mputer-aided instruction project wiilh a team a£ oomputer programers and speciali-s ts in artificial.
intelligence that inoiMed William J.
Schoene, John S.
Brown and Robert F.
Simmons, and the author is greatly indebted to these colleagues for their assistance.
Ques tzoris conc arning the details of actual programs and rourines Lmplemented should therefore be addressed to one of these specialists rather than the author, who served the project in a nari-technical capacity as a linguist.
8 At
the time this CAI project was undertaken two of, the moat successful recognition grammars that had been cons truc ted worn the ~BEJ "Automated Recognition Grammar for English," of CuliCdVQr, et al.(1969), and the work dona at NIT on Project bfAlbC, which is desctibed in Winograd (1971) . The Culicover racognitio grammar is based largely on the gener ative-transfometionaL work of Chomskg (1965) and others, end is a highly complex mechanism that attempts to capture the insights of Chamsky ' s generativetransformattonal model from the recognlt.ion gramar point Q£ view.
Winograd's highly pragmatic recognition procedures, on the other hand, make use of a systemic-type of grammar a la Halliday (1961, 1966, 1967) ; however, the power of WLnograd ' s system is much more in his limited world-model and semantic networks than in his gramar.
Rather than produce an imitation oC either the IBM Recognition Gramar or the MIT Project--it is, in fact, possible that neither of these approaches will ultiiately be the most useful one for recognii tion purpbses-we tr Led to reexamine recent insights, especially Fillmore 's Dteep Case Hypo thesis (1968b), Chafe's semantically-based grammar (1970), and Gruber's work on the Lexicon (1965, 1967) in order ta see how the functions and co-occusrence relations.
they describe .might best be incorporated int~ a recognition grammar without sacrificing the positional insights that much of Chomsky's work has made explicit.
In setraspect, eur greatest debt was to Grbber (1965) This re search was, of necessity, carrred our: somewhat independent of the 9 lingu Ls t LC descriptions presented by these authors s ince they typically endeavor to remain neutral with respect to questions of productton and recognitian in their work.
INTRODUCTION .II The problem we faced is, in general terms, the following: Given (more or ' less) acoura te pareings of s tudents ' responses, how do we, as simply as possible, automate the reconstruction of deeper, more abstract message representations that permit us to make reasonable semantic interpretations?
This paper outlines the essentials of our solution to chis prohlern.
The solution is described in terms of the surfaae structures and deep representations of simple sentences beaause it is eas ies t to understand and evaluate the solution at this level.
The final section will di9suss some complex sentence s-tructures and will demon& s tra te that the paradigma tic technique discussed in this paper can be extended quite naturally to bandle complex sentences as well a's simple sentences.
Given an utterance that is a simple EngLish sentence, or part of a simple English sentence, the grammar driving the parser must, first of all, be capable of recognizing constituents such as noun phrases, prepositianal phrases., finite verbs or verb phrases, 2 By 'verb phtase' we mean not the full 'predicate' but only the root verb with its tense marker and optional modal and aspectual auxiliaries, etc.
10 and adverbs or adverb phreaee in ehte surface string of mxds.
The noun phrase preceding the verb phrase is referred to as the surface sublect; and if there is one noun phrase following the verb, it is identified as the surface oblect.
If two noun phrases follow the verb phrase, there,are objects, identified as surface object1 end surface ablecr2 respectively.
The vezb phraae, plus whatever follows it in a simple sentence, has traditionally been referred to as thg psemdicate; we shall be making.
use of the term in this sense too; hotrwer, the notions swface subjeCp, surface verb phrase,' and 'surface objece(s) are the notions that are most critical in the development of our approach.
Surface Subjects, Surface Objects, and Marked Vs.
unmarked Noun Phrases L All noun phrases occurring in English sentences will be viewed as actants that bear a specific functional relation to the verb or element of predicatio in the sentmenee.
These functional relations (e.g., theme, causal actant, locus, etc).
will be dfscussed in the nexksection of the paper.
We view the identification of the precise functions that all noun phrase actants in a given sentence exhibit to their verb as the basic problem of sentence recognition.
English, more so than languages such as German or Russian, tends to give relatively little direct indication in surhce structure as to what the function of a given noup phrase in a sentence ls.
This is because noun pbrases occurring ae eurface subj ec te and eurface ollj ec ts--with the rxcaption of oome pronominal and interrogat~se or relative dorms-are completely unmarked in English ( . they bear no inflection that would exclude or eugges t a particular function) . Thus we may have a eentence with en unmarked noun pnrase as the sur face subject: ( 1) The object deecended.
Surface Subj . The same unmarked noun phrase may occur as a single unmarked eurface object (2) or aa one of two unmarked surface objects (3) : (2) Jqhn saw the object Surface Surface Sub j . Obj . ( 3) John ga,ve Mary the gbj ec t.
Surface Surface Surf ace Subj . Obj.
1 Obj.
2 Thus
in sentences such as (1) through (3), the only information we can use if we want to identify the function of the noun phrases is: ( 4) a) The order of the NP's with respect to the verb (e, subject and object (if present)).
b) When two objects are present, the order of objects with respect to each other (e., obj 1 or obj c) The semantic class and syntactic voice (e, active/ passive) of the verb.
In cases such as these, where the only infomation we hevs about the noun phrases in a sentence has to do.
with their serial order, we say thet the noun phrases are unmarked.
The surface subject of any English sentence is, by definition always unmarked ( it is not preceded bg a preposition) ; however, it is possible for the other noun phrase(s) in e sentence all to be marked e, preceded bv a reposition) (5), or fox the non-subject noun phrase(s) to be a combination of marked and unmarked noun phrases (6) : (5) The object descended to the -round.
Surface Sub j, (by definition: unmarked) (6) John gave the object to Mary Surfkce Surf ace Marked WP Sub j Object (by definitbn:.
(by definition* unmarked) unmarked) From this point of view, most prepositional phrases are analyzed as marked noun phrases m our grammar, and the lexical shape of a preposition preceding the noun phrase usually gives us some information as to what function the following noun phrase is fulfilling in the septence.
This $nformation is of a different order from the information stated in (4) ; however, we believe 13 that it must be fully tntegtated with such infamation if sentenc6es are to be meaningfully recognized.
At the surface LeQel, then, we are interested in recognizing umerked nopn phrase@ and marked noun phrases (i., noun phrase$ preceded by prepositi~ns); ufi.thin the class of bmarked noun &rases we also distinguish surface subjects from surfficc objects in terms of their po8ttion with respect to the verb* and where two surface objects occur, we number them object1 an& object2 on a left-to-right basis.
When marked noun phrases occur, special attention is given to the preposdtion that precedes the noun phrase.
The voice of the verb phrase of the sentence is also recogntzed at the surface level.
None of this inform&tion, however, will directly cons titute the deep representation of a sentence.
Exactly how this surface-structure inEarnation will be used to arrive at accurate deep representations will becme clear in subsequent sections of the paper.
The elementary functianal relations in our grammar are the following: theme causal actant (C.A).
lqcus goal soarce 14 The be3 is the mos;t;: neutral ectant end the one obligatory actant in .A aimple sentence.
It is the person thing, fact, or.
state of affair8 about which samctbing is baing predicated such se mo'vamant, locatton, ownership (change of location or etate af ownirship), class mecabership, etc.
The functional selatl~n causal actant refers to tho person, object, natural force, fact, or state of affairs etc., ths t; functions to cause or bring about the action, change, or situation described or implied in the predicate.
In addittan, all nouns that may fqnctiort as the causal actant in a sentence are marked in the lexicon with the feature (+potent)--directly or by redundancy rules, following Chafe (1970) . Not all sentenpes will have a causal actant, Where present, the locuC4 is the object or being that the '~herne is a syntactically and semantically defined fuactioflal reldtion introduced by Gruber (1965).
We follow Grubet ' 8 cnpice of terminology and note that a sirnilqr functional relation was referred to as the '~bjecti~ve case' by Fillmore (1968b) and the 'neutral case' by the UCL4 English Syntax Project (1968) 4~he functional relation locus includes under one category the two functional relations that ~ilhare and others have called dative and locative.
This is qain more closely in line with G~ubor's analysis than with otter auailable analyses theme is in, at, on, near, etc.
Its use also implies that there rs no motion of the theme being expressed in the sentence (i4eap the func tional relation ' locus ' typically occurs with s tatlve predicates) . The two other elementary Eunctional relations that may interact with themes, causal ac tants and loci are the directional frmctLonal relatLons 'source' and 'goal'5--the notion of source of ten being marked by ttte use of the prepositions ' (away) frolh' 'out of', and goal being expressed by the prepositions ' to(wards) ' in(to) ', and 'on(to) ' The following six sentences give several examples showLng how marked ahd unmarked noun phrases can be reinterpreted as one of the f lve elementary functional relations defined aboye.
(7) The object descended.
Theme C8) John gave the obiec t to Mary, Source Theme Goal (9) Mary has the obiec t.
LOCUS P heme 5~heae functional relations have been used with great success by Gruber in his lexical inves tigations (1965) . We see the need to employ these notions as primitive functional relations in the type of gramar we have built.
It is possible, however, that they should be treated as motional variants of locus.
This further possible generalization is not utilized here.
(10) Mary br&a the oblect Causal Theme Actant (11) The object is on the tabla.
Theme Locus (12) John carried the,object from New York to Los AnpL%les Causal.
Ac tant Theme Source Gas1 The basic types of sentences that we w111 discuss shortly in terms of 'paradigms1 have, as a minimum requirement, one noun phrase functianing as a therbe; and at most, one occurrenc of any of the five functional relations described above.
In other words, a simple or basic sentence type will not have two noun phrases functioning ag themes, or two noun phrases functioning as causal actants, e tc.
However, English has evolved a number of derived sentence types where hro occurrences 0-5 a given functional relation are possLble.
Consider the following sentences: (13) Hank broke the window.
C.A. Theme (14) A rock broke the wir~dow.
C.. A . Theme (15) The noise broke the window.
C.A. Theme (16) Hank broke the window with a rock.
C.A. Theme C.A.
Direct Indirect In sentence$ 3) through (15), the surf ace subjects, regardless of semantic differences, ate functioning as causal actante in our analysie.
It is only in sentence (16) where two causal ectante occur, that it becomes necessary to distinguish two kinds of causal actants: direct and indirect.
6 Whenever
two caueal actanta occur in an active sentence, the unmarked one in subject position is the obligatorily animate, d'lrect causal actant and the one marked by 'with' that occura later in the sentence is the inanimate tndirect causal ectant.
In Fillmore (1968b) and other caee-type grammars the preposition 'with1 hae of ten been analyzed as indicating the inatrmental case--whl.ch we have reanalyzed as marking an ' indirect causal actant.
' We feel that 'with' does not indicate any given functional relation consistently; rather one of the things Iwith' indicates is a derived sentence type having more than one occurrence of a given functional relation.
In (16) 'with' indicated en indirect celleal actant.
In sentence (17), C~illmore in his cage grammar system dis tingutshes between agentive.
and ine trumental causal ac tants . For our purposes, the functional relation causal actant is sufficient--'agent1 and ' ins trument ' being some thing close to, though not identical to, what we describe as direct and indirect causal actants respectively A given sentence may contain both types of causal actants--in which case the direct cauaal actant is subject.
If only one is present, its direct or lndirect status is irrelevant; it is simply the causal actant subject of the sentence.
1 8.
'with' indicates a co-theme, and in (18) 'with' indicates a eo-causal actant: (17) John went to New York with Peter.
~liziz I Goal 70theme Primary (18) Bill played tennis with EIer ~eusal T-Kzir dl Acttjnt Primary Note that the co-theme in sentences such as (17) and the co-causal actant in (18) must be semantically parallel to the primary theme or causal ac tant with respect tcr humanness or animacy, In sentences such as (19) where 'with marks a semantically non-parallel .theme, two sentences are always involved-the surface object Eunc tioning simultaneously as the rheme of S1 and the locus of S2: (19) Mary saw the man with the cane Locus Theme, Theme Sq JL s1 + Locus S2 The fact that two sentences are involved in (19) is reinforced by a two-sentence paraphrase of sentences such as (20) first suggested by Lees (1960) : (20) Mary Jaw the man who has the cane.
The error of assigning one semantic function to 'with' (or to most other prepositions for that matter) is further emphasized by the ambiguity inherent in sentences such as the fbllowing, which have been discussed in another context by Hall (1965): (21) The detective broke the window with the buralar.
C.A. Primary Theme CO-causal/Secondacy C.A.
A c t anst In one interpretation, (21) means the detective used thc burglar's body to break the window,' in which case, the 'burglar' la functioning as an indirect caueal actent.
In the other interpre tation, (2 1) meana ' the detective and the burglar broke the window together, ' in which case ' the burglatt is a cocausal actant.
Obviously, a good deal of semantic information about the verb as well as semantic information about the noun phrases involved i~ needed in order to specify the exact role of a nqun phrase following 'with.
Before moving on to the next section of the paper, some cemarks are in nrder as to why we use only one category 'locus' for what ethers may dietinguish as 'dative' and 'locative' on grounds of differences in animacy.
Consider the following sentences : (22) John haa a new car.
Locus Theme (23) New York has skyscrapers.
Locus Theme (24) John knows the answer.
Locus Theme Primary (25) The garden knows the answer.
(*~r imary Locus) Theme 20 Sentences like (22) and (23) show us that there is a deep fnntI tional similarity bctwcen so-calltld 'dntivcs ' and lacat ivcs which justifies treating them ur~ifarmly 3s @Xt)ci in prccisclv --I the wev that 'agents' and il~struents ' were seen tu function similarly and were uniformly labeled as causal actants.
Scntcnccs -(24) and (25) illustrntc that some vcrhs requirt? a priruerv (i.e..
mental) locus as thc subjcct.
This su~gcsts rhat tkrc is one I function.21 ca tegorv locus ' --hut that on occasion 1 t is neccssary to distinguish primary (mental) loci from secondary (physical) loci.
In this presentation of our basic and derived functional relations, we have tried to point out that there is no need to posit many different functional relations in order to distinguish among the kinds of causal actants, themes, loci, etc.
When and where features of animacy, purposiveness, etc., rJisc the need for dis tinguishing either primarv loci (animate) from other loci or direct causal actants (agents) from other causal actants, the apparatus is available in the form of lesical features of nouns, Classification of Verbs into Paradigms In several of Fillmore's papers (see 1968a and 1968b) it is I I suggested that each English verb be assigned a case frame" that would indicate what functional actants occurred obligatorily and optionally with a given verb.
Translating from Fillmore's cases tpto our functional relations, this would mean tBPt the lexical entry of verbs like die, open, and kill, would contain information much as 19 represented in terms of the case frames shown in (26), (27), and (28) re~pectively.
(26) die +[ ] thcsg r (C.A).
(27) +[, ] theme (direct C.
A. (inditec t c A=) ( -1 (28) kill +[ ] theme + (indtrec C.A.
Notation: { ) = disjunction ( ) = optionalfty 1 ] = case frame C.A.
= causal actant What these lexical entries meaa is that die occurs only with one obligatory ac tent ' theme' (29).
The verb* open, like die, has an obligatory theme (30a) but also an optional causal actant (30b),which may even be realized as direct causal actant plus an indirect causal actant (30c).
The verb kill again has the obligatory theme, but, in this case, the causal actant is also obligator(y (31a) ; there is also the possibility of expressing the required causal.
actant as a direct causal plus an indirect causal actant (31b).
(29) John died.
TEEiz (30) a.
The door opened.
7Sheme b.
John opened the door C.A.
Theme c.
John opened the door with e stick.
direct theme indirect C.A.
C,A* (31) a.
J~hn killed Roger C,A.
theme b.
Johh killed Rogor with a knife.
direct theme indirect C,A, C.A.
While agreeing in spirit with Fillmore, we propose to take the,, case frame suggestion one step further and make it more useful in terms of grammar recognition.
Since there are numerous verbs that behave exactly like -9 die many others that behave exactly like open, and a good T mber of others that behave like -# kill we propose to establish paradigms that summarize or recap4 tulate the functional felations and syntactic and semantic featdzes of large classes of verbs.
Then the only feature needed in the lexicon would be a specification of which ~aradigm(s) a given verb sense belorged to.
In other words, for verbs that are like die.
(i. ee., require a theme which occurs in surface subject position and do not permit a causal actant), we establish the intransitive paradigm.
For recognftion purposes, the paradigmatic feature intransitive tells us that the surface subject is functioning as e theme, that B causal actant is impos~ible, and that any other actant must be marked by an appropriate preposition.
The verb kill, however,, is a membel' of.
the transitive7 paradim which requires.
both a theme and a causal actant.
7~ote the ~3i.f ference between our use of the terms transitive and in_tlan_e_itive and the traditional and generatL~e uses.
In traditlonal terms, ' transitivet means merely that a verb takes both a surface slibject and a surface object; in generative terms, ' transitive has meant.
that a verb i capable of being passfvized.
h nur system.
transitive means that a verb takes a causal actant surface subject and theme surface object in the active voice.
We stress this distinction because many of the verbs that allow.
the passive transformation do not have causal actant subjects in the active voice (e.g., Mary claw the men/ the men were seen by Mary ).
. This is why we stress that our use c>E the term transttive t:~ describe the behavior of a particuLar verb paradigm is more specific and functionally odented than other usages of the term.
While it is true that all of our [+transitive] verbs may occur in the passive as well as the active voice, this fact is not e defining property of [+transitive] verbs in our system but a redundancy rule of sorts.
Likewise, intransitive means not only that the verb takes a surface eubject and no unmarked surface object but that this surface subject is functioning as a theme.
Furthermore, from the recognition point of view, we know that for all verbs marked [+transitive] tho surface subject is the causal actant and tho surface object is the thcmo iT tho ve'rh is in the active voice.
A large class of verbs like open belohg to what we refer to as the ergative pbradigm.
8 'Ergative' is a surface srackre typological term long used by linguists to characterize the grammar of those languages that seem to assign the same syntactic role or case to both the subject NP of an intransitive verb and the object NP of a transitive verb.
('Ifgo languages typically described as ergative are Basque and Eskimo).
In the lidht of this definition, the behavior of open and the other two verbs in the examples below appear to be 'ergative': (32) a.
John opened the door.
b. The door opened.
(33) a.
The heat melted the ice.
b. The ice melted, (34) a.
The pressure increased the temperature of the air.
b. The temperature af the air increased..
8 We
prefer this traditional term to Lakoff 's rwhet unconventional use of the term 'inchoative' in his dissertation, The Nature of, Syntactic Irregularity (1965), and elsewhere to describe similar phenomena.
What happens in thegs sentences is that if che causal actant subject of the (a) exemplee ie preeent, it is the surface subject; and the surface object, which mu8 t also occur, is the theme.
If no causal actant is present, the surface crubjec't is the theme end there is no surface object.
Also the verb ib an active, declarative English eentence mast, aa e rule, come second.
Thus if there ie no causal actant present filling the eubject elot, the theme (or a noun phraae beating some other functional relation) must fill the subject alot.
There ere &any ergative paradigm9 verbs in English.
In par ticu'ar, the vecabulary of the meteoro,logy lessons that our project was centrally concerned with contains many verbs belonging to this ergative paradigm (e.g., move, (re)distribut@, reduce, relate, replace, skew, slant, spread (throughout), s tbrt, a top, decrease, transfer (in) to, weaken, break(up), boil, begin, dry (out), dissolve, decompose, divide (into), condense, form (out of), etc).
. 9~orne readers will question the need for an ergative par& digm and suggest tbt each such verb be assigned to both the intransitive and transitive paradigms.
However, both the economy gained by srating just one paradigmatic feature for verbs like open and the apparatus which then permits us to explain the relationship between raiselrose -9 kill/die a9 suppletive erga tive forms convinces us the t this paradigm feature is extremely useful if not necessary.
26 The above ergative paradigm verbs retain the same lexical shape whether or not a causal actant is prcscnt in suhj,ecr pnsition.
However, there are also o large numhcr of pairs of transitive-intransitive verbs that, by virtue oE their sement ic (and sometimes phonological or orthographical) s imilerity, should.
perhaps bc cbsified as suppletivc members of an ergative.
verb pair.
The transitive membct of thc pair occurs vthcq 3 causal ac tant is present; the intrans it ive member sccufs when no causal actant is present.
For examplet: (35) a.
The pressure ra,.ised the temperature of the air.
b. The temperature of the air-\rose.
(36) a.
John killed the rabbit.
b. The rabbit died.
The full ergative paradigm of some verbs contains a stntive level as well as the two nonstative levels we have been discussing : (37) a.
Henry opened the doow.
(-+€.A,, -state) b.
The door opened.
(-LA., -state) c.
The door is open.
(-C.A., +state) (38) a.
John killed the rabbit.
(Kd., -state) b.
The rabbit died.
(-C.A., -state) c . The rabbit is dead.
(-C ..A., *ate) The functional relatiol .of the subject in the (c) sentences above is the same as in the (b) sentences--the differenoe between 2 7 them being thw statiw vs.
the nonstative nature of the verb phrase.
Thie d.iff$rence some-times has no effect on the surface forq of the verb in irregular cases such a9 (37c), but it is more generally the case that a different qurfa~~e form occurs dead of (384) -+he regularly different form being not a (e.Et., . 1ex;icelly related adjective like dead but a paec ~art~icipla (e.g., th,e ddor ie cLo8ed).
The (a) Pentences above contain what Chafe (19703 oalls,activity predicates, the (b) sentences process predicates, and ehe (c) sentences s tative predicates.
Crriber (1965) has discussed transfer verbs at length, and based on his discussion we have found it desirable to establish three transfer paradigms.
First of all, there are the two-way transfer verbs which allow ovest expression of both a source and a goal: \ trans ferked Secondly, there are source-subject transfer paradigms which permit goals but not sources to be overtly stated in the predicate since the subject is the source of the transfer.
to Mar . d Thirdly, we also have the goal-subj ec t trans fes paradigm which permits sources hut not goals to be directly stated in the predicate, and the subject is the goal of the transfer since s from phrese is implicitly or explicitly e-reesed.
8 watch from Jane.
-Tnezno Source Somewhat similar to the transfer paradigm is the one-way putltake paradigm that includes additive verbs like put in(to)/ on(to) (42) and privative verbs such as take out, of /off took Source In this paradigm virtually all of the verbs can be used in conjunction with either goals or sources--denoting the theme's corning to or going from a locus respectively.
The preposition makes clear which case is intended.
A few of these verbs even permit the expression of both source and goal in the predicate, and these verbs form a separate two-way putjtake paradigm (44): (44) Mavis out of the house tnta the garden.
pushed Theme Source &a1 There is another paradigm for verbs like 'have' which requtre a locus as surface subject and a theme in object position (45) : c.5) gci; ) a f;cgtune posse e8 erne A paradigm for the converse of (45) includes verbs such as I occupy which have surface subject themes and take loci in surface ob j ect position (46) : Theme Locus There are several other possible paradigms which will not be mentioned and illustrated hece.
The point we want to make is that large numbers of verb senses can be classified in a way that facilitates recognition: the semantic function of surface subject3 and objects of verbs can be easily ascertained by ref erence to a paradigmatic feature on the verb.
Paiadigms and Trangforma t ions The paradQms discussed above interact with a nusber of movement and deJetion transformations that should also be diecussed, Firstly, a number of English verbs permit a transformational deletion in the surface structure of e lexically unspecified yet semantically delimited surface object theme.
For exanple, a verb such as eat may occur either with a lexically specified object theme (47) or with a lexically unspecified one (48) (47) Bill ate a sandwich.
c?r Theme (48) Bill ate.
a CK Theme (= food/something edible) 1 We describe sentences such as (48) as having undergone an eccusative deletion.
The deleted indefinite theme must be lO~he term 'accusativef has been usea by language typologists to refer to languages that treat the subject of an intransitive verb and the subject of a transitive verb with the same inflection.
Also, im languages commonly described in terms of case grammar the accus,ati.ve case generally corresponds closely to our notion of a surface object in English.
We have borrowed this term and are using it to specify a particular type of deletion that occurs.
in English.
reconstructed if all the functional relations expressed in the sentence are to be explicitly staged in the deep structure.
Other examples of verbs with potential accusative deletion in the data are: conduct, evaluate, gain, lose, observe, read, recall, under8 tand, consume, etc . Another type of transformational deletion occurs with virtually all motional verbs such as -9 run move -9 stir, walk, jump, etc., whenever the surface subject of such verb is [+ animate] . Consider the following senteqces : (49) a.
The mechine ran.
Theme b.
The door moved.
Theme (50) a.
John ran.
Theme and -C.A.
b. The cat moved 'heme and C,A The sentences in (49) which have inanimate surface subjects conform perfectly to the intransitive variant of the ergative paradigm discussed previously ( ., the surface subject functions as the Theme) The sentences in (50), however, are somehow different in that the surface subject is not only functioning as a theme but also as a causal actant since no external causal actant has been explicitly mentioned.
We can roughly paraphrase this type of sentence as follows: (51) a.
John cawed himself to run.
b. The cat caused itself to move.
Since such paraphrases are not possib'le for the sentences in 32 (491, we assume that a reflexive' deletion takes place in sentences with transitive-paradigm verbs of motion or verbs of self-oriented habit (e.g., wash, dress, shave, etc).
When an animate surface subject functions both as the causal actant and the theme of the [+transitive] variant of an ergative verb; then the coreferential theme/causal actant Fs not stated b~icc in the surface structure if tho vorb may undergo reflexive deletion.
11 The
accusative and reflexive delet,ions discussed above help to explain an interesting ambiguity that occurs in sentences such as (52) : (52,) Mary washed.
which may have either of the interpretations in (52') d : (52 I) a.
Nary washed (the laundry) b.
Mary washed (herself).
ll~his is different, of course, from what happens to verbs that permit overt reflexivization.
However, these no~d@letable reflexives tend not to include verbs of motion or verbs af selforiented habit.
(i) John cut himself.
(ii) Mary wore herself out.
(iii) The dog prdte'cted himself.
Since the transitive paradigm verb wash will be marked in the lexicon as additionally permitting either the accusative deletion or the reflexive deletion, the two ambiguous readings OX (51) given in (52) will be automatically predicted by the recognition grammar since the accusative deletion rule will recopstruc t (52a) and the reflexive deletion rule (52b) . In addition to deletions, the grammar recognizes and effectively ' reversesT various movement transformations or permutations that may have operated to produce the surface structure of certain sentences.
A well-known movement transformatibn is the passive transformagion which operates on a sentence such as (53) and produces (54) : (53) Dick purchased the car yesterday..
(54) The car was purchased yesterday by Dick.
A subsequent transformation may optionally delete the 'by' phrase in (54) yielding (55).
(55) The car was purchased yesterday.
Given a sentence such as (54) our rules will 'reverse' the passive transformation and yield (53).
Given a sentence such as (55) our rules will reverse the passive transformation and produce aq active structure similar to (56).
(56) Someoae purchased the car yesterday . The procedure sews simple enough yet th~re are many problems involved in che accurate recognition and rovcrsel of p@ssive sentences First of all, not all 'by' phrases co-occurring with a passive verb call be reanalyzed as the surface subject of the corresponding active sentence: a.
by John.
(57) The rations were increased by the sea.
by noon.
by 50 Of the above four 'by' phrases, only (a) could function as surface subject in theactive voice version of (57) ; semantic features are needed to determine whether the noun object in a 'by' phrase is a causal actant, a location, a time, or a neasurement.
In our lexicon John is [+potent], sea is [+,s tationaryl, noon is and percent is fe-atures will allow our passive reversal rule to construct a reasonable active voice var tant for all the passive sentences in (57) . Another problem in passive reversal concerns the verbs in the various transfer paradigms.
For several of these verbs most speakers of English recognize two different passive permutations (e., (59) and (60)) of the same active sentence (58): Active (58) John gave Mar the book.
Source 'd Theme 12~ny unit preceded by a cardinal number gets reanalyzed as a measure phrasef 35 Passive (59) Mary was aven tHe book (by.
John). (60) The book was given (to) Mary (by John).
In such cases.
semantic information about the surface subjects and surface objects of the passive sentences is required if the 'theme' and the 'goal' are to be properly labered in the deep structure.
In such caees tho following feature hierarchy--or something like it-+seems to operate: human animate (6 1) s ta tionary concrete abstract The two nouns involved as ' goal ' and ' theme ' seldom are at the same level on the hierarchy in terms of their lexical features, and the one that is higher thhn the other is always the goal.
Thus in (59) and (60) --irrespective of the surface order in the passive--'Mgryl is analyzed as peal and I the book as themo . Some readers no doubt may wonder why we have bothered to write rules that depassivize13 sentences.
The answer is that we wish to get optimum efficiency and accuracy out of our paradigms without indefinitely prolif @rating their number.
The paradigms are set up to assign functional relations to the marked and unmarked noufl phrases occurring in active declarative structures.
By first reversing the results of deleti.on transformat ions, question trans£ ormations and other movement transformations (e.g.
passive), we are able to use a minimum nun\bes of paradigms to assign accurate functional labels to all of the noun phrases in a sentence.
The paradigms for transfer verbs just discussed above with respect to the passive transformation are also involved in another movement transformation which we refer to 8s 'goal focus' 13we are for the moment ignoring potential ambiguities and changes of meaning caused by changes of quantiFier ordering in active and passive sentences such as those which Chossky has pointed out (1965) . e.g.
(I) Everyone in the room speaks two languages.
(can be Interpreted as being different languages for each person) (2) Two languages are spoken by everyone in the room.
etends to be interpreted as two specific languages that everyone speaks) To explain thia transformation be must first establish the difference between iumediate source8 and goals on the one hand, and remote sources and goals on the other.
With verbs of transfer ip the active voice, the surface subject is a source, goal, or causal actant, The theme is the surface object.
Other aspects of the motLon or transfer are usually implied.
The following examples illustrate this : (62) Johd sold the house.
7 (Implied: to some 'Goal ' ) 7 Source meme (63') Harry bought a dune buggy.
zeal Theme (64) Sam brought the beer.
~azl Theme Ac tant (Implied: from some 'Source') (Implied: from so'Source' and to some 'Goal') Verbs like 'buy' (e.g., get, obtain, acquire, fetch, borrow, etc,) and verbs like 'sell' (e.g., teach, serve, donate, give, lend, etc).
have an ilmnedtate goal and an immediate source in subject poaition respectively.
In addition, they may exgrass a remote goal or a remote source, bvth of which get marked with the preposition "for " The following examples show that, if I1 the subject embodies the function source," the optional "for" phrase will also embody (remote-) the function of source.
If the subject expresses the function "goal, then the optional "for" phrase may express (remotely) elther the funotion "goal" 11 or the function source.
11 (65) John sold the-house far Harr, 1m7 meme dur c e source (66) Harr bought a dune b -8 for his son 1-e Remote goal goal or Remote source Transfer verbs like 'bring1 that oxpress B causal actant in subject position and LqpLy both source and goal are also It ambiguous when occurring with an optional f or1' phrase unless it is clear from the contest that the causal actant is functioning on behalf of a lremote source or for the benefit of a remote goal.
(67) Sam brought th beer for us.
c a= T#ZKEEZFE goal ac tant or Remote source.
In the above sentence "for us" can meenl'for our use or benefit, I I in which case "for us" represents a remote goal.
It, also can mean "at our request, acting on our behalf," in which case "for US" represents a remote source.
One way of disambiguating sentences like (67) is to apply 'Goal Focus' movement (68) whenever the remote goal sense of "for NP" is the sense intended.
&8) Sam brought us the beer.
C aux GO= Theme 'Goal Focus' can move either a goal (70) or a remote goal that immediately follows the theme (69) to a p~sition of focus between the verb and the theme.
14 (69) a.
John bought the house for Mar 1iZiia -a goal or Source b.
John bought Mary the house.
I-. Remote Theme goal goal (70) a.
John gave the book to Mar . Source meme + John gave Mar the bo&.
b. Source d Theme Whenever god.
L,KJS movement occurs, it seems that the remote goal loses its preposition end becomes a goal object more intimately associated witti the verb than it had been as a 140ne apparent condition on "Goal Focus" movement is that th theme may not be a pronoun (the goal may be either e noun or pronoun).
In other words, it can not occur with sentences auch ea the following: a.
John gave it to fR:l] b.
*John gave it.
However the possibility (in fact the grarnmaticality of utterances such aa "ginme it"!
(%. em, Give me it) renders this condition dubious.
prepositional object.
15 Our
grammar makes use of several other deletion and mvement reversiqg tr'ansf~rm~ationa that will not be discussed horc.
What we have tried to illustrate in this section of the paper is that both paradigms and transformations arc useful componen to in a recognition gramar.
l%e have reascn to believe that an obj eo tivalization movement rule like Focus' in Eng1,ish is also widely used in other languages.
French, for example, appears to have a movement operation even more general than the goal-res tr ic ted objec tivalization transformation of English.
It is for this reason that speakers of French say sentences such as "open me the door" when speaking English.
English does not permit the movement of "me" to object position in this sentence because "me" is a remote causal actant or source and not a remote goal In "Open the door for me.
" In this sentence "(you)" is the 11 immediate causal actant and source and the verb open" belongs to the ergatiwe paradigm and not to the movement-transfer class of verbs.
Thus the rules oE English do not permit "~oal FOCUS" movement to apply in such a case.
In the course of the development of this recognition grammr we noted that ccrmp1e.tive aspect (..
inference, of completion ve.
no inference of completion) sometimes serves to di$ t inguish highly similar verb paradigms% In such cases, both the lexical ahape of the verbs end the prepoeitione, as well as the order of ectanta in the surface structure, play a role in signaling the presence of completive aspect.
Recall the paradigm for verbs of putting and taking (71) discussed earlier in the paper: (71) a.
John put water in the pool.
lZ7X7 [-comp etive1-e Goal took the groceries out of the bag.
be W [-completive~ ~hemb Source Note that the verbs of the sentences in (71) are not marked as having completive aspect: one cannot infer that the pool in (71a) ie full of water nor that 'the bag' in (7Lb) is empty of groceries.
There is, however, another paradigm similar to the put-take' paradigm but different from It in that all of ite verbs indicate completive aspect.
We refer to this [+completive] paradigm aa the 'join-separate' paradigm (72.), which is the paradim to which the verbs fill and empty, for example, belong.
(72) a.
Jch filled che pool with water.
F.x [+completive] Locus Theme emptted [hompletive] the ba of roceries, d* 42 The sentences.
in (72) --unlike those in (71) --do allow us to infer that ' tho pool' in (72a) is full and that ' the bag' in (72b) is empty This is boceuse.varbs of joining--which mart their theme with the preposition '~Fth.'--end verbs of separatingwhich mark their theme with 'of1--are elway8 [+crmplctioc] Other examples of j6ining verbs are: fill, supply, provide, s tock, cover, present, furnish, plant, smear, sprinkle, e tc . Additional examples of separating verbs are: relieve, empty, rob, deprive, withhold, rid, clear, drain, deplete, etc.
Some English verbs--= well as being used to express the completive notions of joining and separation--may also be uged to express nm-completive activities such as putting or taking.
This dual: function of the verbs has been the source of much confusion and unsatisfactory analysis, and is a topic we should, therafose, like to pursue in some detail.
In Rall (19165), for example, the following sentences were cons-idered more or less equivalent and thus relatable vi.a a transformational rule which considered the objec-c paint in (73) as basic and the object 'wall' in (74) as derived: (73) John smeared paint on the wall.
(74) John srneare'd the wall with paint.
Fillmore (1968b, p.
48) e-xplained these sentences by suggesting that both 'wall' and 'pint' were originally supplied with prepositions reflecting the lorcatisre and instrumental cases 43 respectively.
This yields 'on the Gall' and 'wlth paint' in the deep structure.
Fillmore then analyzed the verb smear as having the following property: whichever of the ttwo deep structure elements concerned is chosen as the 'direct object', it must fall next to the verb and must lose its preposition.
While more ar less agreeing with Hall's intuftion that 'paint' is a basic 'objectv--in our system 'theme1--Ln (73) and a derived'object' or displaced theme in (74), we disagree with her implicit assumption that sentences such as (73) and (74) are syntactically or semantically equivalent or the explicit proposal that they should be related by a transformattional rule.
We also disagree with Fillmore's decision to analyze 'with' in sentences such as (74) as an ins fance of the instrumental case.
In our view, aspec tual differences between (73) and (74) call for a different assignment of Jeep structure functional relations and necessitate the postulation of distinct paradigms.
In our analysis the surface object of (73) is a theme; the verb "smear" expresses an activity similar to "p~tt~ing" in (73) and ' the wall ie the goal of the theme 'paint'.
In (74) 'smear' is being used to express the completed joining of a displaced theme--i.
e., 'paint1-to the llocus--i.e., 'wall'.
In other words, our SOBution will analyze verbs such as 'smear '.
as belonging to two 1 dirfererrt paradigms..
In one of the paradigms, smear' behaves like 'putr and in the other it expresfses joining af a location and a theme.
In this latter sense, the displaced theme is expressed optionally, though always implied as something present but unspecified if not overtly expressed: (75) a.
John smeared the wall with paint.
b. John smeared the wall.
(Implicit: with something) (76) a John filled the glass with water.
b.. John filled the glass.
(Implicit: with scitnething) In the non-complbtivc sense of 'smear' where 'well' functions as goal, this 'goal' element is obligatorily expressed and not deletable, ran his brother 1 (77) a.
John smeared paint on the wall b.
*John smeared paint.
Z ( in the box 7 (78) a.
John put the bohk j (over) thOre l b *John put the book.
Verbs of joinibg and separating are not the only ones belonging.
to a paradigm that signals completive aspect.
There are two paradigms for verbs of contact that also can be used as examples.
First consider the non-completive contact paradigm stones at the wall.
kicked Goal In sentences auch as those in (79), we cannot infer that the theme made contact with the goal; we assume the theme moved toward the goal, but we do not know whether contact was -made.
Contrast theee sentences with verbs occurring bn the completive contact paradigm (80) : (80) John {:: } the wall with stones.
K?r ombarded Locus Theme (i-comple tive) These sentences in (80) force us to infer that the theme has made contact with the locus; no other interpretation is possible.
In the two sets of paradigms discussed above, some unusual phenomena have taken place.
In those cases where the verb signals completive action, the surface order of ac tants in active surfaces is as follows: Surface Surface (81) Subject Object Marked NP + W?
+I NP [tcomple tive] 1 + prelw C.A.
Locus Theme 46 This is not,the normal order of elements.
The usual surface order for active sentences containing B cau~a1 actant, a theme, and a locus is the following: Surf ace Surface Subject & Obj ec t V Theme Prep 9 NP Thus is appears that we get completive aspect only when a locus occurs in the position where one wauld normally expect the theme to occur.
This hypothesis is confirmed by a completive gal~digrn with no unmarked surface objects that has a locus in subject position instead of a theme (83).
This paradigm is similar to the noncompletive paradigm which has the theme in subject position (84) and foll~ws the normal order of constituents for sentences having only a theme and a locative actant: (83) The arden is swarming with bees.
* [+co13pletive] Theme are swarming in the garden.
T erne [-completive] Ldcus (84) i?
The meanings of these sentences have been debated by Fillmore (1968b) and Chomsky (1972), among others.
Fillmore assigns the same case representation to (83) and (@+) sugges tins that there is a difference of focus with perhaps some corresponding difference in cognitive content Chonsky points out that the sentence8 are not synonymous--that in (83) the bees are neces; earily all over the garden but that in (84) the bees might be only around their hive.
In light of our analyses of sentences (71) (80) we suggest that both Fillmore' e remarks and Chomaky ' 8 remark8 are correct but indomplete.
The functional relations exhibited by the noun phrases in (83) and (84) are the same, the verb aspect ie different.
This auggeets that there are two paradigme involved: a completive paradigm accounting for (83) and (85), and a non-completive paradigm accounting for sentence (84) and similar eentences like (86) : Theme + verb + Locus [ -completive] (85) a.
Passengers are riding in the bus.
b. Fish swim fn the stream.
c. Groceries were in the bag.
Locus + verb + Theme [+completive] (86) a.
The bus is sagging with passengers.
b. The stream teems with fish.
c . The bag bulged with groceries.
With lexically different verbs and prepositions as in (85) qnd (86) the two paradigms are eaeily distinguishable.
When there is lexical overlap in different verb penses as in (83) and (84), the prepositions as well as semantic features will serve to distinguish [+completive] paradigms from [ -completive] paradigms Paradigms and xncotporation In the second section ~f Gruber (1965: 5-27) there fe a discussion of the gramnatical process of inc~rporation.
The term incorporation has been used most frequently by 1ingui.s ts working on American Indian languages; however, (Sruber's discussion of incorporation along with the following discussion of certain ~aradigma supports the position that the concept of incorporation is needed to describe in full generality certain lexical and grammatical facts about English.
Gruber discusses verbs that obligatorily or optionally incorporate certain adver-bs or pre~ ositions . For example, Gruber claims that the verb cross obligatorily incorporates the adverb across.
He illus trates this with paraphrase relations in accept able sentences such as the following: (87) John crossed the stteet.
(88) John went across the street.
Note also that the sentence below is impossible: (£39) *John crossed across the street.
The lexical and grammatical facts cannot be explained with maximum generality unless the verb cross is analyzed as a motional verb similar to a yet also incorporating Me adverb across.
Another example of incorporation that Gruber provides concerns ve~bs co-occurring with the preposition for.
The verb want _.
obligatorily requires and incorporates -9 fbr while thd verb yearn requires but never incorporates for.
The verb wish, however, requires for end allows both poesibilitiee (is incorporation of for is optional) . Gruber 's examples illustrate this : (90) a.
John wants a book.
b, *John wants for a book; c.
*John yearns a book.
d. John yearns for a book.
e. John wishes a book.
d. John wished for a book.
These verb-preposition co-occurrences would be very difficult to explain economically without making refereace to the notion of incorporation.
Likewise, in setting up the paradigms needed to account for a large number of verbs in English we realized that certain verbe could be best described as belonging to a particular paradigm but, in addition, incorporating a specific noun actant.
For example, the paradigm describing source-subj ec t transfer verbe like ~ive, -S send sell, etc.
can also include verbs like help, aid, Bupp ort, etc.
if we recognize that such verbs incorporate the theme but are otherwise exactly like the sourcesubj ec t transfer paradigm: Normal Source (91) John the car to Mar Transfer Source sent Tlizird Goal Focus (92) John gave Mar the car Source dTheme # incorporating %elpad Source (93) John Wansf es Source supported The fact that these incorporating verbs can be paraphrased as follows further reinforces this analysis.
(94) John gave to blsrv S ounce %T Goal Focua (95) John gave Mary Source { %ip } support The theme is not the3 only actant that may be incorporated.
Another such example of incorporation is found in verbs such as %, chart, graph, stratify, etc,.
which resemble two-way transfer verbs like bring, trans.fer, take etc.
except that the goal actant has been incorporatad in the verb Thus we have the regular two-way transfer paradigm: e (96) John and th'e goal-incorporating version of the two-way t~ansfer paradigm: (97) John the statistics.
Theme This analysis is again reinforced by the possibility of paraphrasing the goal-incorporating two-way transfer verbs as follows: (98) Jdhn transferred the s tatis tics onto the causal Theme Ac tant Goal Once it is recognized that part of the lexical description of a verb may .Include the fact that it belongs to a particular paradigm but also that it incorporates a particular functional relation more typically expressed by a surface noun, the paradigms will apply to many additional verbs, and thus many unusual phenomena can be explained more consistently and adequately.
Consider the verb 'surface' as it occl3rs in the two following sentences--which on a superficial level appear grammatically similar : (99) Phil surfaced the treasure chest.
(100) The men surfaced the sidestreet.
In eaob of these sentences the verb has incorporated the noun 'surface' as an actant; however, in (99) the goal actant has been incorporated and in (100) the theme actant has.
Thus the verb 'surface' is being used in two very different ways The following paraphrases of the abave sentences will help clarify this.
(99') Phil brought the treasure chest to the surface C v Theme Goal v.
mrr -*# 0 4 is Without the notion of incorporation such pairs of sentences would pose sevcra dif ficul tics for our paradigmatic analysis of verbs.
Given the notion of incorporation as a working hypothesis, however, virtually every verb in English will hc explainable in terms of a finite set of paradigms.
One final axample of incotputation that wc would like to discuss has to do specifically with verbs of precipitation.
ining owing izzlin eeting Such sentences are unusual because the surface subject is a lexicallv empty dummy elcment it, so it appears that this sentence-type has no real theme.
This could be somewhat dis tressing since we agree with Gr'uhcr that a predicating element and a theme are the minimal and obligatory elehlents in every sentence.
Again, the notion of incorporation proves to be useful.
If we analyze the verb in the above sentences,as being very much like the minimal verb "fall" yet incorporating the theme, a plausible a'nalysis is achieved in terms of both patapbrasability and paradigm as s ignmen t . (102) It is raining.
b" dummy +Theme subject (103) Rein is fallinp, TliEz The related historical fact is that English sentences require the verb in second position; thus verbs that for some reason (e.g., incorporation) are without an overt nominative subject to function as theme have come to require an empty it' (referred to as the impersonal or expletive it) in subject position.
From the Surface Structure of a Sim~le Sentence to its Deer, Functional Structure In the recognition grammar that we have developed, the first step in making a correct deep structure analysis of a simple sentence is the surface grammar's parsing of the noun phrase (8), prepositional phrase(s) (i . e, marked noun phrases), the finite verb (phrase), and other possible surface structure constituents such as conjunctions and adjectives or adverb phrases.
At this point, it musf be established whether the form of the verb bhrase) is active or passive.
The next step consists of looking up the surface verb in the lexicon to determine (i) what paradigm class it belongs to and (ii) what movement and deletion operations may apply to the verb.
Next, it ie possible, and in fact very simpla, to taks each unmarked noun phrase and to ascertain Nherhor its surfacc structure role is subject or object and to mark the noun phrases ancordingly . Finally, by using the lexical information, a set of hnuristics is consulted to assign the proper deep structure functional relation to each noun phrase occurring in the sentence.
On= this has been done, rules of interpretation or "understanding1' my be applied to the deep str8ucture which has been recons eructed by the recognition gramar . We shall now apply all these rules and strategies (except for the rules of interpretation) in an admittedly oversimplified fom to a sentence in order to demonstrate the sequence of the procedure, The simple sentence we shall consider is the following: The hea~ slowlv evaporated the water.
(104) Step I: Apply surface grammar rules and parse the sur.-= face s truc ture into labeled constituents . The heat + slowly + evaporated + the water NP ADV v(p> NP Step 11: Assign a surface role to each NP not preceded by preposition.
The heat + slowly + evaporated + the water SUBJECT OBJECT Step 111: Determine the form of the finite verb (phrase) active, (simple past) Step IV: Look up the verb 'evaporate' in the lexicon for paradigm classification and its features of movement, dele tion, and incorporation.
er~a tive Step V: Look up the predetermined heuristics for surface sentences with active-ergative deletion verbs.
Heuristic : For sentences with active, ergatf veparadigm verbs : (i) If there is a subject and an object, the subject is a causal actant and the object is the theme, (ii) Pf there is a subject but no object, the subject is the theme.
(The stative form of an ergativetransitive verb always uses this s tra tegy ).
Step VI: Apply appropriate heuristic of Step V to surface information de tennined during Steps 11-IV and transform the surface s tructure into the appropriate deep s truc ture . (105) a.
Surface structure: The heat -+ slowly + evaporatkd + the water NP ADV v(p) WP SUBJECT ACTIVE OBJECT ERGATIVE [ +TRANS ITIVE $lQ%?k CAUSAL ACTANT / the heat the wateq 7 Thus the recogni,tfon system is conceptually complete as far as simple sentences are concerned, and col.nuplex sentences cm also be handled, given oertain modifications that will be discussed briefly in the following sec tions . Extension of the System to Cowlex Sentences It would be impossible to review all our procedures concerning complex sentence types in English; thus we shall merely exemplify our techniques f acus ing mainly on inf ini tival--and marginally on gerundive-gsentential cdements in the process.
Embedded sentences typjcally contain a number of optional and obligatory surface deletions Which must be recovered.
Recons truc tions involve those sub j ec tless predicates that are a result of deletion transformations taking place as part of the embedding process.
For the sake of comparison, we have provided in (106) wtences which have undergone subject deletions or movements of this type, and sentences in (107) which have not.
(LOG) a.
Sid wants to go there, Sub j ec tless predicate b.
To ~6 there would be unwise.
Subjec tless predicate C.
Camping is en j oyable . Subjectless predicate d, The children started playing.
Subj ectless predicate (107) a.
Sid waited fox John to come.
embedded subject b.
It would be unwise for Eric to go there embedded subject c.
Walter's insulting us came as no surprise.
embedded gubject d.
The mother regretted her son's having stolen the money.
embedded subject In order to capture the fact that the infinitival and gerundive verb phrases in (106) have embedded subjects that have been deleted, moved or left lexically unspecified, our grammar makes use of the following highly general rules: (108) a.
Insert a 'for + A ' subject before any infinitival phrase not already preceded by a' (for) + NP' subject.
b. Insert a ' subject before any gerundive (i.e.
-ing) verb phrase not already preceded by either 'NPt or 'NP' [+ possl Let us consider spec-if ically four types of 'for -st embedding situations that move or delete subjects.
Equi sub1 ec t-subj ec t dele tion: Equi obi ec t-aubj ec t deletion: ('lo) John told B 1 --+ John told Bill to go.
I Subject-to-subject raising: John begalif to run.
A John run Sub 1 ec t-to-objec t raisin&: Mary wants NP .-p Mary wants Jahn to go.
I Note that in all of the above cases, when the lower sentencu loses its subject through either movement or deletion, the lower predicate becomes infinittvalized.
l6 -om the txmognition poht of view these movements and deletions mug t be reversed if we wish to reconstruct the subject wd ptedicate of lower sentences accurately.
The first step in our procedure is the application of the rule stated in (108b) since rhas will identify subjec tless predicates, thas permitting the rules to build tentative deep s eruc tures . (113) John wants to go: -) John wants for 2 to go l7 _) tentative deep syntactic structure: John wants NP 1 for -S, 161t should also be pointed out that gerundivization as we1 as infinitivalization can result from either of these operations (em&, John began running; I like playiag volleyball, etc).
17we are tentatively inserting a deleted ' for a ' in all such cases ; however, this is a s implication which may eventually turn out to be infelicitous (em in some cases it may not be necessary to insert a 'for').
(114) John told Bill to go.-) John.
told Bill for A to go.+ tentative deep syntactic structure: CIp 'S %-*\ JO~A tbld-~iir~p for -S / L ---^-I A go (115) John began to run.
-+ John began for iA to run..
. ...--+ tentative deep as\ ---,, --, syntactic erructure: .-.
John began NP I for -S / ' *--3 A run (116) mry wants John to go.-) Mary wants John for A to go.
+ tentative deep syntactic structure:/ Mary wants John NP I for -S \ LL-LL The next thing we must do is classify verbs in such a way that we can correctly ftll the deltw in all of the above strut.tures.
Thus instead of describing a verb as a 'subject-subjec t deletion' verb (log), we will describe it as a 'copy subject' verb (ll3h so we know that the higher sub j ec t must be copied onto the delta in the embedded sentence in order for the syntactic deep s'ttucture to be complete and accurate.
The following table shows how the features in our recognition grammar correspond to the features that might be used in a generative grammar.
--... -----& *I ------_L 7 Recognition Feature I --J--Feature I / 0b j ec t-subj bc t deletion Subjec t-to-s'ubJect raising I,I, ; hope, ask...
I ! Copy Object 1 I tell, order, I i comand..
. I Y Drop Subject began', conI tinue, tend, B seem... i I* Drop Object I want, expect, I ~9ish,,, Once these features have been assigned to the appropriate verbs, the tentative deep syntactic structures can be finalized.
There is, however, one trans formation which must take place before the analysis of embeddings begins, and this is the 'passive-to-activ.el transformation.
Thus a sentence such as (117) is first changed to (118) before the embedding procedures are effected, (117) John was told to leave.
(118) A told John to leave.
If this transformation were not carried out, all features of ob j ec t-embeddingverbs would have to be re-analyzed in the passive as follows: 1 1 4 Active Voice i Passive V~ice . ---.
4 +-I-I Copy Object I Copy Subject i Drop Obj ect I 1 Drop Subjecr: -----.-----I-----------.--..----.
... s 63 While it would not be particularly difficult to change these epecificatione, it seeme quite unnecessary in light of the Pact that de-paasivization must, in any caee, be done before the appropriate paradigm heuristic applies; thus it can easily be carried out before embedding procedures apply as well.
Paradigm analysis then begine with the lowest (i.e.
moat embedded) sentence in the tree and m'ovvo up with the result that an entire embedded sentence (via an intermeaiate NP node) is functioning as theme or causal actant in a higher sentence.
The procedures outlined above for dealing with certain types of complex seritences--however partial and sketchy-do indicate that it is possible to extend the verb paradigm recognition technique to complex sentences, i.e., its use is not limited to sFmple sentences.
Concluding S tatemen t Although many details have been omitted from this paper, we believe that such an approach is as linguistically and psychologically valid as other theoretical or pragmatic recognition procedures developed to date.
Innovations in linguistics end psycholinguis tics such as Bever and Langendoen's use of "perccptual strategies, " which explain as well as account for certdin I81n addition to the automated IBM Recognition Gramar of Culicover, et ale (1969) and Winograd's work at MIT on Project MAC (1971), both of which we mentioned in the introduction, there is, of course, also the Halle-Stevens "Analysis-by-syn thesig" model (1964), which must be considered as a candidate for a recognition-grammar model theoretically--even though Halle 8pd Stevens were concerned with speech recognition per se.
Although we can see that the "Analysis-by-synthesis" model is useful in explaining hallucinatory reconstruction of speech and related phenomena, we feel that neither their fully active model (nor a fully passive model for that matter) will prove to recons,ruct accurately the complexities of normal human speech perception or to explain human language recognition and comprehension.
65 facts of historical.
syntax (1972), tend to con£ irm our working assumption, which is that there are perceptual cues in the surface structure of English that are critical in grammatical recognition.
We hypq thesize that these perceptual cues, when combined with lexical informatian and information regarding the patterned movements and deletion8 that take place in syntactic con£ ismations i . paradigms, trans£ orma tions and incorporations) make up much of the "knowledge" that the speaker of a language gradually acquires and then uses in recognizing and understanding the sentences of his native language (or any language he learns and knows, for that matter).
We are convinced that this knowledge overlaps wLthY yet is somehow 3 different from, the knowledge and skills that are required if one wishes to produce grammatical sentences in a Language, Kelley (1968), for example, has postulated that comprehension is baaic in language acquisition and that rules of production are not essential for comprehension but may develop alongside of the necessary comprehension rules to satisfy other goals and purposes.
If Kelley's model is correct, it indicates that human recognition graannars--an essential component of comprehens ion--are,not mere inverses of human production grammars.
This, in turn, suggests that the most efficient computer-based recognition procedures will be based, not exclusively on generative productiontype grammars, but also on principles and 66 rules similar to those that human beings would seem to employ expressly in language recognition ana ramprchcnsi~n.
On tho othe,r hand, the model also suggests that the most realistic tecognition procedure will overlap to a considerable extent with a produc tion-type grammar--utilizing, in different ways, a groat deal of tho same information.
In the development of our recognition model, such psgchoZinguis tic considerations proved to be aos t useful.
REFERENCES Beveq, T.
and D.
T. Langendoen, "The Interactior.
~f Speech Perception and Grammatical Structure in the Evolution of ~anguage," paper psesented at the UCLA Conference oa Historical Linguis tic8 in the Perspective of Transformational Theory, February, 1969.
This paper is publishsd in Lin~uis tie Change and Generative Theory, R.
S tockwell and R.
Macaulay, eds., Bloomington: University of Indiana Press, 1972.
Chafe, Wallace, L., Meaning and the Structure of Langbage, (Chicago: University of Chicago press), 1970.
Chomsky, Noam, Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, (Cambr>idge, Mass MIT Press), 1965.
Chamsky, Noam, "Same Empirical Issues in the Theory of Transformational Grammar.
" Reproduced by the Indiana University Linguistics Club, 1970.
Culicover, P., et al., "An Automated Recogni tion Grammar for English," Technical Report FSC 69-5907, IBM, Boston Programming Center, Cambridge, Mass.
02139, July,1969.
Fillmore, Charles JJ.,"Lexical Entries for Verbs, I' FoundB t ions of Language, Val.
4 (pp.
373-393), 1968a.
Fillmorb, Charles J., "The Case for Case, " in Universal$ in Linzuistic Thory, Bach and Harms,eds.
(New York: yolt, Rinehart, and Winston), 1968b.
Gruber, Jeffrey, "Functions of the Lexicon in Formal Descriptive Grammars, " Sys tern Development Corporation, Santa hhnicn, CCalif., TM-3770, December, 19.67.
Gruber, Jef frep, "Studies in Lexical ~elations," bIIT Ph.D. diss~rtation, Sep t~lber 1965.
(Reproduced by fhe Indiana Lrniversity Linguistics Club, January, I970 ).
Hall, (Par tee), Barbara, "Subject and Obj oc t in Hodcrn English, " NIT Ph.D. dissertation, J~ne~l.965, Halle, M.
and K.
N. Stevens, "Speech Recognition: A ?lode1 and a Program for Research," in The Structure of Langukge, Fodor and Katz, eds.
(Englewaod Cliffs, N.
J.: PrenticeHall), 1964.
Halliday, M.A .K., "Categories of the Theory of ramm mar,I1 WORD, 17, 1961.
Halliday, b1.A .K., "Some Notes on 'Decp ' Gramnar, " Journal of Linguistics 2, 1966.
Halliday, M.A.K., "Notes on Transitivity and Theme in English, Journal of Linguistics, 3.
1967. Kelley, Kalon, "The Role of Semantics in Early Syntactic Acquisition," unpublished paper dated July, 1968.
Lakoff, George, "The Nature of Syntactic ~rregularit~," The Computational Laboratory, Harvard University, Cambridge, Piass., Report No.
NSF-16, December, 196 5.
Lees. R.
B., Grammar of English Nominalizatioris, IJAL, Vol.
26, No.
3. Part 11, July, 1960.
UCLA English Syntax Project, (principal investigators: R.
P. StockueLL, P.
M. Schachtet, and B.
H. partee), Integration of Transformational Theories of English Syntax, 2 Vols, prepared under contract No.
AF 19 (628-6007, for the U.
S. Air Farce, La G.
Hanscom Field, Bedford, Mass., October, 1968, Report ESD-TR-68419).
(Later publiehad in a revised and somewhate abridged form as The Malor Syantactic Sttuctures of English by Stockwell, Schachter, and Partee, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Wins ton, 1973.
Winograd, Tersy, Procedures as a Represkntatibn for Data in a Computer Pro~ram for Unders tandLnp; Natural Language, Project MAC, MAC TR--84, Mass.
Institute of Technology, 1971 .

