American Journal of Computational Linguistics Microfiche 31 A CASE-DRIVE14 PARSER FOR NATURAL LANGUAGE Brock H.
Taylar and Richard S.
Rosenberg Department of Computer Science UniversFty of BritLsh Columbka Vancouver, B.
C., Canada V6T 1WS Copyr-i ght 1975 by the Association for Computational Linguistics This paper describes a system for analysing natural language basea on the concept of case.
After a preliainary parse using an augmented transition network, the case routines attempt to find the appropriate verb meaning.
These routines search for parts of the syntactic structure which best satisfy the requirements of the verb case frames and under back-up are able to weaken gradually the conditions far success.
The resultinq structure is similar to the conceptual dependency networks of Schank, and is an attempt to represent as fully as possible the meaning of the input sentence.
The spstea has been designed to be quite flexible and allows for the incorporation of domain specific knowledge.
This knowledge has its effect both in the nature of the dictionary and in roaifications in the search routines, At present the syster incorporates procedures for resolvkng anaphoric references which depend on examining previous sentences.
Table of Contents -I----Introduction Cases and Verbs 2-1 & Partial List of Cases 2.2 Determination of Cases 2.3 Verb Specific Cases 2.4 Verb Definitions A Detailed Example Other Examples Anaphoric Reference Conclusion Bibliography wl=u B C'ASE-DRIVEN PARSER FOR NATURAL LANGUAGE Brock H.
Taylor and Richard S.
Rosenberq It has been apparent for some time now that a linear approach to natural language processing consistrnq of soccessivcl syntactic, semantic, and retrieval or inference phases is inadequate.
An important advance war; mad3 by Winograd[ 9.10 1 in integtating these phases into a system which utilizes the various kinds of linguistic knowledge at the appropriate trine.
The approach described in this paper is somewhat less ambitious, but this is partly compensated for by its very flexible structure.
In fact, it is useful to view this system as a skeleton which can be fleshed out to serve a vide varlety of purposes.
Although called a parser, it is far more powerful thdn ttadit ional parser because it incorporates semantic knowledge to produce a representation of the inpu-t sentence which in as rich as possible in terms of the system's basic knowledge.
Since the 2 Contact R, S.
Rosenberg for information on [ 8 1.
detailed operation of the system viLl be described subsequently, we will now present the najor infxuences on this uork, some similar systems, and what ue believe the i~portant contributions to be.
Beginning at the end, we decided to represent an input sentence with a structure which is very similar to the conceptual aependency networks of %hank[ 5,6 1.
This does not imp11 agreement with the overall philosophy of Schank, but rather a recognition that an underlying representation should contain as much knowledge as possible, as it map be crucial for subsequent analysis.
As will be seen, our representation, in addition to the basic syntactic relations, also reveals semantic relations not explicitly given in the input.
sentence, This latter knowledge is derived f roa a conplex seaantic lexicon organize& around the concept of case as first formulated by Fillmore[3].
One point should be emphasized: Fillmore, as a linguist.
was concerned uith foranIating a theory to explain data which a traxisfarmatioaal a~~roach seened unable to ao, AS such, he felt the need to worry about the number and nature of the cases necessary to treat the f ingaistic data adequately.
Thrs is to be contrasted with our approach which is ta use an extended version of case in order to represent the meaning of a sentence as fqlly as possible.
The basic difference is revealed in illn no re's aescription of five or six cases, whereas our system uses, at present, twenty-four cases.
Perhaps the tar.
ncasetl is inappropriate here, but there is anough similarity with, and motivation from, Pillmore's vork that we decided to use the term.
The most complex part of the lexicon is the verb with its associated case frame: actually an environaent of obligatory and optional cases associated with the verb.
One basic problea of sentence analysis is to choose among alternate verb meanings for an appropriate aandidate, This selection process is governed, in patt, by attempting to satisfy the constraints imposed by the case frames associated with each verb meaning.
But prior to activating the case-driven part of the system, a preliminary stage of analysis must be initiated.
This is an almost purely syntactic phase carried out by a rather siaple augmented transition network (A, (Roods[ 11,12 1).
he AT1 has proven to be very useful in natural language processing mainly because of the ease of representing complicated and interrelated syntactic structures, For our purposes, the ATH is used to produce a very fast preliminary parse of the input sentence which indicates gross structural re la tions, Using this parse, the case-driven component seeks to select the appropriate verb meaning.
It is importaat to note that if the Gase procedures fail on the first pass, condition@ for success are progressively weakened until the most suitable meaning is chosen.
Although not a feature of the present system, it would be possible to re-enter the ATN phase in order to produce another parse if the case phase were unable to complete its task in a satisfactory manner.
Ye would like to stress those aspects of the systea uhich aake it flexible and useful for a wide range of language processing applications.
It is straightforward to incorporate different kinds of knowledge necessary for adequate processing.
Puz exa~ple, the current syste~ has a procedure for resolving a fair range of anaphoric references for pronouns.
If additional procedures are developed, they can also be incorporated into the system, and will exert their inffiuence by aodifyiag the search procedures for candidates which satisfy the reqaireaents of the case frane for verbs.
another important feature is the facility within the dictionary entries of nouns for providing inf oreation about relevant properties, such as superset and subset.
Thus a kind of semantic netuorh links nouns of the dictionary, and this knouleage is available to aid in the processing.
The user can construct the dictionary appropriate for his purposes and can readily add necessary do~ain specific f eatares.
This system is considerably more than just a front-end for a traditional linear language proaessor.
~t integrates syntactic and se~antic linguistic kflovledge in a particularly transparent and flexible mannet.
There are other current language systems ubich are based on nations of case but which differ mainly in the uap.
the processed sentence is represented, Ue might mention ~imaons[7], Martin[4], and Brace[ 1 1.
The system is written in LISP/!lTS, and runs on an IBB 370168 under the HTS operating system at the University of British Columbia.
The code occupies 240K bytes, and the current dictionacy of 450 words occupies an additional 90R bytes.
When the system is running the total space used is 470K bytes.
In spite of its large size, it is relatively fast.
For example, the total time taken to parse sentence (11) below, is -90 CPU seconds, executing interpretively.
A con piled version of the progran uould run approximately 10 times faster.
2. Cages and Verbs The question a£ how many cases we need to describe English is a contentious one, Pillaase[ 31 is vague on the issue, whereas Celce-lurcial2 ] claims that five cases will do.
The purpose of this work is to capture as much of the meaning of a sentence as is possible, and to make it explicit in a formal structure.
Case, then, is an explanation of the semantic function of a sentence part; theref ore a fairly large nonber of cases have been used, one for each of these "semantic f unctionsw.
Ye are not adamant about our set of cases.
The systea is flexible and structured enough, that the addition or deletion of cases is a simple operation.
The system was originally designed with lartin1s[4] thirtyodd cases as its basis.
There are currently twenty-four general cases implemented, plus numerous verb-specif ic cases.
Some of Hartinas cases have been dropped completely, sone have simply not been i~plemeated pet, and several new cases have been added.
For a complete list of these cases we refer you to TaylorC8 1.
A feu will be listed here, and they will later be used to aid in the description of the systea.
The underlined phrases represent the appropriate cases.
Asen t io white says he has no friends.
1 got wiped oat by S~P& ~hiKb~i&h~ LoaE mgBe trained 9 handred m~g just to kill ae nllhorn Bhlld* 1 washed u uetIj ds in the rain.
fatb Ye started up moiaq~&jg.
Through the qhg~g the wind is blowing.
Flagged by by.
abopt, along, up, down, around, across.
gxc_hnaa I bought it uith a Ukle and I sold it for 3 a=.
He wants to trade the game he plays for shelta, Flagged by with, for.
I fought every man for &g until the night vas oven.
I. sing this to up ccic&f.&s, I sing this for um!s Flagged by for, to, before, vd (A case of the Noon).L Suzanns takes you down to her place near 242 gab.
The uoaan in me is asking f~r revenge.
The hand of youg beis burdened down with roney.
Flagged by of, fro., at, in, on, with, by, near.
beside, before, after, along, up, down, dround, across, under.
Enable I bad to kick poa down the stairs so could savour unemploppent once qqain.
lie put her away so.
Could get back to the war.
Flagged by so.
Topic It is time we began to laugh about it all agairi.
Lets not talk of lovs chains.
Sometiaes I find X get to thinking of the past.
Flagged by of, about.
2.2 Deterrinatia
of Case Bast of the cases listed above are ass~ciated with the prepositions that flag them.
This is, of course, a qross oversimplif %cation of the relationship between verbs.
prepositions, and cases.
A preposition which flags one case for one verb may very well flag another case for a different verb.
(1) f walked about the roaa.
(2) 1 talked abdut the room.
For verbs of movement lfker "ualkt', naboutn flags the path case as in (I), but for verba of communication like '#talkv(, it usually flags the topis case as in (2).
flartio[4] notes this, and proposes for each verb raaning to list all of the cases flagged by each preposition.
This involves a great deal of repetition, however, since nost prepositions flag almost the same sat of cases for aost verbs.
For this systen, therefore, we set up a master-table of all the cases flagged by each preposition, then for each verb, just the irregularities are noted.
(3) The scandal was whispered about the room.
Sentence (3) illustratas thztt mabout" can flag the path case for a coaaunication verb, so ue do not want to rule out the path case: we just want topic to be tried first.
In (3) the topic slot vill already be filled by "the scandal*, so topic will be rejected, and the path case will be tridd neyt.
This faregrounding of cases is specified in the dictionary.
For instance, for the verbs talk, laugh, whls~er, etc., it is specified that the occurrence of the preposition "about" should trigger the topic case before the path case, There is another obvious way of determining case naaes for prepositional and noun phrases.
Copsider the sentences: (4) Fred bought the car foe nary.
(5) Fred bought the car for one dollar.
The preposition *form flags many cases.
In (4) it f laqs the beneficiary case, and in (5) it flags the exchange case.
~ssociated with each case is a test which a phrase must pass to be accepted, In the beneficiary case the test is: (BUST-BE ABIHATE), indicating that the beneficiary has to be anisate, while the test for the exchange case is: (HOT (SaoULDBE HUIA11 ABSTBACT)), indicating that one does not usually exchange something for a person or soaething abstract.
These tests corre~tly sort out the cases in sentences (4) and (5).
In general, tests on cases are verydifficult to design adequately.
What test wonld be appropriate for the topic case?
Uhat could not be talked, Laughed, or coied about?
Perhaps some complex verb and context dependent test co,uld be concocted, but one has not been designed for this system.
The rest for the topic case is therefore ope which will always pass.
One must therefore be careful when invoking the topic case, The exchange case has similat probleqs, Anythinq can bla exchanged for sonething.
The weak test (NOT (SHOULD-BE HUMAN ABSTRACT)) is put in, which will at first fail if a human or an abstract noun is the candidate, but will pass if nothing else seems to fit either.
This simple test runs into problems with certain sentences, (6) I paid the money for ny mother's release.
(7) I paia the money for my nother.
(8) I paid the money for the prostitute.
It will initially force the exchange case to reject "for ~y mother's release" in (6) because it is abstract, but later on it will accept it since all of the other cases flagged by *for1@ will also reject it.
Sentence (7) is ambiguous, but "mothern is alaost certainly in the beneficiary role here, so again the test vorks correctly bp rejecting the exchange ease.
Sentence (8) is also amhiguous, but our interpretation would usually be that wprostitutew is in the exchange case here.
The system will, however, assign it the beneficiary case as it did in (7).
Additional work rust be done on case tests if this pacadign is to be useful, 2.3 verb Specific Cases &any verbs have special constructs or cases which are not used with most other verbs.
These irregularities are handled by writing special functions to find these cases.
A few exaaples will ixlnstrate, The verb "to hew has eight ~eanings in this system.
The thira neaning is rto hate the property.
. ", as in sentence [9), (9) The house is red.
This meaning 1s the one being used if an adjective phrase immediately follovs the verb.
An adjective phrase in this position is therefore a special case of the verb "to bew, and there is a special function, ADJ-IIST, vhich Iooks for it.
The sixth meaning of "to bem is "to be fro.
. . m., as in sentence (1 0) . (10) The lady is from Onagadouqon.
This could be interpreted as an example of the source case, which is the case that mfroam usually flags; but what the sentence really means is that the lady has been living in Ouagadougou.
This is, therefore, not the source case, but another special case of nto hew.
2-4 Verb Definitions The verb is treated as the focal point of the sentence, A verb can hare millnip rreanings, The system discovers which meaning is intended by looking at the rest of the sentence.
In so doinq, it builds a structure representing a parse of.
the sentence, As stated above, each verb has associated with it a caseframe, which is a set of cases of the verb: some obligatosg, some optianal, and sole conditionally optional.
These cases are embedded In a form on tbe pxaperty list of the verb, Consider the verb "to order,* Its dictionary entry is as follows: (ORDER V S-ED PREP-CASE ( (9ITH PITE) ) V-ME&% (IF ( (AGEST (BUST-BE HU8bR) ) ac (OPT [GETR PASSIVE) 'SOIIEONE) (PATIEHT (RUST-BE &BIBATE) ) PA OBI' (TO-COBP (GETR PA) ) TOC OBL) (BUXLDQ ("<==>" ? w+u (m<--m OBDEB w+n)) AG TNS TOC) ( (AGEBT (BUST-BE HUMAB) ) AG {OPT [GETB PASSSVE) SO8EOIE) (PATIENT (ABD (I(UST-BE THIUG) (NOT (HOST-BE BUIAP) ) ) PA OBL) (BUILDQ (*<==>" ? *+* (w<--n ORDER ))?
AG TES PA))) Under the indicator V-!!EBB there is a form beginning (XP [ (AGBlJT . . IF is a function which takes an even, but other~ise variable, nuaber of argaaents, each pair representinq a meaning of the verb.
The first element of each pair is a set of cases to be looked for, and the second is the structure to be bailt if they are founa.
It is in the first element of the pair that the complexity lies.
Let us look at it more closely.
The list of cases is.
in fact, a list of triples.
The first elaaent of the triple is a fora to be EVALed.
It is usually looking for a case.
but any form is admissible.
The second element of the triple is an atom: a register name.
If the first forn EVALs to a non-BIL value, the Value is put into this register.
In aur erample, for instance, the first triple is: (A,GENT (MUST-BE EIUHAH) ) AG (OPT (GETR PASSIVE) "SOBEONE) The function of the Zirst form is to find the agent of the sentedce.
If it succeeds, this agent is put ineo register AG.
The third element of the triple indicates what to do on failure, If it is the atom "QBLA, this indicates that the casa was ~bligatory; so if it was not found, IP should fail on this meaning of the verb.
If the atorn is "OPT", then the case is optional, the register is left empty, and IF continues with this meaning.
The thira possibility is that this third eleaent is a forn, in which case it is EVALed.
If it returns mOBLw.
or 90PTm, then the result is as described above.
If it returns anything else, then that is put into the register, and IF continues with this meaning of the verb, The third element of the first triple for "to order" is COPT (GETB PASSIVE) 'SOHEOZOE).
OPT is a very siraple function uhich, if its first arguaent is non-MIL, returns its second arguaent.
Otherwise it returhs "OBLn.
(GETR PASSIVE) is true if the sentence is in the passive voice.
The first triple can be read as follows: Look for an agent which lust be human.
If you find one, put it in register &G.
Otherwise, if the sentence is passive, nake SOLIEUHE the agent.
Otherwise fail.
The second triple is simpler.
It merely says: If you find an animate patient, then put it in register PA, else fail.
The third triple is equally simple: it is not looking for a case, but a to-conplement.1 If these three elements are found in the sentence, then the spstea will look no further, but assaae that it has found the correct leaning of the verb.
It will EVAL the second f orr of the pair, in this case: (BU1LI)Q tm<==>" ? + (n<-," ORDER +)) TPS Toe) whicb builds the basic structure for the sentence.
BUILDQ takes a variable number of argu~ents.
The first is a kind of teaplate with slots in it.
The rest of the arguaents fill the slots.
The denotes a slot which is filled by the contents of a register.
IOUA-PUT returns the structure of ths noun phrase associated with the noun in this register.
The ""? is filled by the application of the function BOON-PUT to the contents of a register, Finally.
the "#* (see Appendix) indicates chat a form is to be EVhLed, and the result put into 1 An example of a to-coaple~ent is: Vred took the book g,ngpr m* the slot, The slots are filled in order by the second, third, etc, arguments, It should be noted that the form of BUILDQ has been strongly motivated by its use in Moodsq ATN [11].
So in this case: (E1OUN-PUT (GETR BG)) is put in for the ?, (GETB TEJS) in place of the first +, (GETR TOC) far the second +.
where GETR Leturns the contents of a register, Programming details do not belong in a paper of this kind.
A11 of the code is in Taylor[ 8 'j for those interested.
In the following example, then, function names and excessive details will be, on the whole, left out.
A detailed account of the basic algorithm and control structure will be given.
Ue will look at a simple sentence.
lore conplex structures such as relative and subordinate clauses are treated in nnch the sane way as their parent sentences, consider the sentence: (11) The Ban beside the window played the piano for Nary.
as stated above, the first step in the process is a partial parse using an ATN.
The structural description usually derived from this parse is incomplete.
That is, no decisions are aade about what modifies what, what meaning of -the verb is being used, etc.
The basic idea behind the ATN is to find the verb but while it is doing this, it seeas useful to chop the sentence up into its parts.
There are problems with just hou this chopping should be done, but with most sentences it is straight£ oruard.
The AT8 parse returned for sentence (11) will have the f ollaving for P: S WP MIL DET THE N HAW BUBBEB SG PP NIL BESIDE NP MIL DZT THE N YINDOY NUBBEB SG VP BIL TB S PAST VOICE ACTIVE v PLAY NP BIL DET THE N PIAPJO NUPlBEB SG PP NIL FOR NP NIL #Pa MARY It is on this preliminary parse that the program works, First, the main verb is found, and a function is invoked which controls the top-level back-up, This function EVALs the form on the property list of the verb under the indicator V-HEAN, This form for PLBY is a very long one, ana is given in the appendix.
The forn in question is a call to IF.
whose machanisn has been briefly described above, In this* instance IF has ten arguments, indicating that there are five meanings to the verb PLAY in the system.
The first meaning is nto play a usical instsnlnent, " The first case looked Ear is the AGENT, This agent should be a musician, ana nost be human.
This search is initiated by ElAling the first forn in the first triple of the first argument to IF: (AGENT (AND (SHOULD-BE HUSXCXAB) (BUST-BE HUMAN) ) ) AGENT is fairly complex, but basic all^ it looks for a component of the ATI parse (in future called the "p-parsev, for partial-parse) which is in an appropriate position to be an agent, and which passes the test (the argnhent to AGEHT,) By 'appropriate position' is want, for instance, that if the sentence is in the active voice, the agent is ~obablrr the first noun phrase in the sentence.
For this situation, AGENT inrediately finds @?the manR as the obvious candidate, and it applies the test (AHD (SHOIILD-BE IltJSICIAB) (RUST-BE HUMAN) ), HOW, unless something special has been put on the property list of HAN previously, the (SHOULD-BE BUSICIAN) part of the test will fail.
(There are tua levels of tests in this syster: SHOULD-BE tests and NUST-BE tests.
Tbis aechanisa is very use£ ul for forcing a verb like PLAY to look very hard for a musician to play an instrument -but to accept any human if it fails at first.
This is especially powerful for resolving anaphoric references).
Thus AGEIT fails, which invokes the third eleaent of the AGENT triple: (OPT (GETB PASSIVE) 'SOIIEOIIE) . This may be read as: AGENT is optional if the sentence is in the passive voice, in which case pat SOlEOlE in as the agent; otherwise AGENT is obligatory.
Since the sentence is not passive, AGENT is obligatory.
As the AGEIT case was not found, this first neaninq of PLAY fajls, IF then goes on to the next pair of arguments.
This pair is designed to pick up the meaning of PLAY as in nto play music-,g1 Bote that the test on AGEHT is just like the previous one, vhich means failure here as well.
The program moves on to the third meaniqg of to PLAY: "to play a sport," Here the test on AGENT is (AND (SHOULD-BE SPORTS-UAH) (HOST-BE HUBAIJ) ) . Once again, providing fl4H does not have SPORTS-flAl on its property list, this attempt fails.
The prograa therefore goes onto the fourth meaning which is designed to pick up the ergative usage of "to playw as in HThe music played fran the room,fl Since the test for this meaning is (HOST-BE IUSIC).
this neaninq will also fail.
On to the fifth, and last, meaning, which is a sort of catch-all.
It is the beaning of "to playn as in "to entertain oneself".
Here the test on AGEMT is (flUST-BE AMIHATE).
flThe mant1 passes this test, since UAl has the property ANIMATE.
Since AGENT is the only case looked for, this meaning is taken to be the correct one, and the following structure is built by the call to BUILDQ: <==> N BAN IUUBER SG <-DEFINITETEE PISST <-DO <-CBUSE<==> N aB8 NUMBER SG <-DEPIHITETHE PRESENT < HAVE-PROP ERTE3TAINED IF has completed its job.
It has found what it takes to be the correct meaning of the verb.
Nou the reof the sentence mast be processed.
The seconil elenent of every top-level list in the p-parse is a flag vhich is initially NIL, but which is turned on when that part of the sentence is considered to be correctly dealt with.
In our example, so far only two parts are flagged: the first noun phrase: "the %anw, and the verb phrase.
The function which takes care of the rest of the sentence simply goes down the p-parse checking these flags.
If it finds one which is MIL it works on that part of the sentence until it either succeeds, or fails -causing back-up.
For this example, then, the first phrase it comes upon needing work is the prepositional phrase: "beside the window".
As rentioned above.
there is a raster-table in the systen vhich aBS0Ciates each preposition with the cases it Bay flag.
BESIDE flags the cases: LOCATIOI and DESCRIPTIVE.
A11 of the cases but DESCRIPTXVE are cases of the verb.
DESCRIPTIVE is a special case vhich is used for preposition phrases which modify noons.
When the list of cases associated with a preposition is retrieved, there is a question as to uhich case to try first.
For this there is a foregrounding routine, with several criteria for f oregrounding : First of all, in the dictionary definition of the verb, the user may specify that a certain preposition trigger a particular case program.
Since there is no such specification for "to play" in the current dictionary, nothing hap pens here, Secondly, on the property list of each verb is kept a record of uhich prepositions flagged vhich cases in the previous sentehces.
The cases associated with the preposition in question (if there are any) are foregtounded, so that they uill be tried first (the mst recent case first, etc).
Pinally, if DESCRIPTIVE is one of the cases in the list of cases for this preposition, and if a noun phrase or a prepositional phrase immediately' precedes the Jf phrase in question, and if the noun in that noun phrase or prepositional phrase is not a proper noun, then DESCRIPTIVE is put at the front of the list, and is thus tried first.
This seemingly obscar~ rule for foregrounding the DESCRIPTIVE case is just a heuristic.
If the tests associated with each case are good enough, it makes nb difference to the final outcome iE the foregrounding is done or not.
In some instances, houever, if the DESCRIPTIVE case is not tried first, it will never be tried.
In our exa~ple, for instance, it is the man who is beside the vindow (DESCRIPTIVE case) ; he did not play the piano beside the window (LOCAT'ION case).
But it is perfectlp' feasible for him to have played it beside the, window (if we know nothing about the location of the piaao).
Therefore either of the cases will succeed.
It is only the position of the prepositional phrase that indicates which case is correct.
Continuing with our exaaple: the DESCRIPTIVE case is foregrounded.
and so the descriptive case function, DESC, is invoked with the phrase "beside the windova as its argument.
Since the descriptive case almost always involves a prepositional phrase modifying the noun phrase or prepositional phrase im~ediately before it, DBSC first checks to see if "beside the viado@.
is a possible descriptor of "the man.
Since we do not have a data base to check to see if there is a man besiae a window, our check must be a general one.
Host nouns have a size associated with them under the indicator OBJ-SIZE, This is a very crude breakdown of physical objects into eleven size categories.
*The uorld@l is size 10 and "a pinM is size 0.
(These sizes should be able to be changed by classifiers, adjectives, or modifying phrases.
A toy elephant is probably not the sane size as an elephant.
This feature is currently not implemented).
The check for "beside" is merely used to rule out things like *the pin beside CanadamW Because abstract nouns have no size inforaation, sentences like "Be had a thought beside the oceann are not ambiguous.
In any event, "beside the window" is found to be a likely modifier of "the mann, and DESC succeeds, Since wbesidew is a locative preposition, DESC returns the structure: A forn is stacked which will put this structure into the main sentence structure if the rest of the sentence can be handled.
Just where it is placed is determined by DESC, Since the prepositional phrase modifies "the man*, it will be put in as follows: J HAPJ BUMBEE SG <-DEFINITETHE <-LOCBESIDB % WIIDOV IlfHBER SG <-DEPLBITETHE so the prepositional phrase "beside the vindow* is flagged as completed, and the next unflagged phrase, "the piano", is picked UPHere we run into problems.
lhere does "the piano* fit into the structure?
Vhat does it modify?
%hat is its case?
There are relatively feu ways a noun phrase can be used at this point, It copla be an exaaple of the TIaE case, as in nI came home this morn..".
bat flpianol fails the TXBE-test.
It could be a classifier, bat the phrase follosing it would have to be a noun phrase for this to be the case.
So failure has occurred.
Scmethiag has gow wrong, IF must have chosen the wrong meaning of the tarb, The program must back up.
A11 the parts of the sentence flagged as used are unflagged, and back-up occurs into IF again, Here it is found that thete are no reaaings of the verb left to try.
One of the ssaaZngs that wag rejected earlier most have been the correct one, So IF fails entirely.
and the program enters the top-level back-ap rechanisn.
There are two possible reasons failure has occurred: 1) Either the progran did not look back far enough in an attempt to resolve an anaphoric reference, or 2) The tests were too severe, (ie: the SHOULD-BE tests caused failure when they should not have,) The anaphoric part of the system has not been explained pet, but as there were no pronouns in the sentence, the first reason can be ruled out.
In order to ueaken the tests, a flag is set to shut off the SHOULD-BE tests, That is, all SHOULD-BE tests will succeed in future.
The process begins again with IF, The beginning is the same, but this tine he first invocation of AGERT will succeed, because the test (AND (SHOULD-BE BUSZCIAIQ) (HUST-BE HUBAZII) ) succeeds, The structure it returns is put in the register AG, IF continues with the second triple of parameters, and the form (PATIENT (HOST-BE HOSICAL-IISTBTJMEIIT~ ) is EVALed.
Bow, PAT1 ENT is very similar to 1GBBT: it looks in the appropriate place in the sentence for the! patient of the verb, It then applies its TEST to it, In an active sentence, such as our example, the candidate for PATIEIT is the first noun phrase after the verb, The pianon is found, and since it gasses the test (MUST-BE HUSICALIEJS'ERUBElrlT).
PITIEWT returns "the pianom as the patient of the sentence.
Once again it seems that the correct meaning of the verb has been found, therefore IF EVALs the BUILDQ associated with that seaninq.
The folloving structure is built: <==> B BAN NUMBER SG <-DEFINITETHE PAST <-DO C-CIIUSE<==> rJ PIEL100 1PU&BEB SG <-DEFIBITETHE PZlST <-EB IT BP 19 SOUND It aou remains to try to clean up the unflagged parts of the sentence.
The first one, again, is "beside the windowm, and exactly the same thing is done as was done previously: it is decided that "beside the window" is a locative aescriptor of "the manm, and this decision is stacked for later action.
The only other part of the sentence to be handled is "for l!Iaty.m 4s with nbesidem, the cases associated with "forw are returned f roa the CAS B-TABLE.
They are: DURATION, BEHEPICIABY, EXCBAIIGE, and IBD-SUBJ.
(IID-SIIBJ has not been iapletaented yet).
Assawing that tbare hare been no relevant previous sentences, the foregroanding of cases vill have no effect on this ordering.
The DUBATIOH case is tried first.
DURATION is a particularly simple case.
Basically it checks to see that the noun phrase in the prepositional phrase has the property TIRE under the flag B-PROP, "flaryw fails this test, and DUBATION is rejected, The next case is BENEFICIARY.
The only test for this case is that the noon phrase be animate.
"naryn passes this test since it has the SUPERSET WOHBN and WOHAN has the N-PROP ABIBATE, Therefore BENEFICIARY succeeds and returns: &,<-BEHEPZCIABY(NPR RABY) ) . Unlike "beside the uindov", this phrase is a case of the verb.
Because all cases of the verb (but AGEIT and PATIENT) are considered to be essentially parallel uith respect to the verb, they are put into the structure at the saae level, that of the verb symbol fl<--w, and their order is arbitrary.
A form is stacked to put the above structure into toe main sentence structure in the correct location.
Bext the p-parse is checked for any unused phrases, None are found, and the program terminates by placing the two forms into the structure, which is returned as the nmeaninglg of thb sentence: <==> B BAN NUHBER SG <-DEFINITETHE <-LOCBESIDE B WINDOW QTUHBEB SG <-DEFINITETHE PbST <-DO <-CAUSE<==> N PIAblO gU8BEEt SG <DEPIRITETHE PAST <-EnXT NP L3 SOUPJD <-BEIIEPICIARYPPB MARY A gloss of this structure night be: the man, uho has location mbeside the vindouw, in the past did something which caused the piano to emit sound.
The beneficiary of his action 4.
0th~ Examples A few examples of sentences handled by the systea are given here.
Space constraints do not allow us to include parses, for all the sentences but the remainder are in Taylot[8].
The man vith the wife who is bigger than he goes to Vienna with a wonan who is saaller than he, PARSE: S NP MIL DET THE N BAN WUllBEB SE PP NIL YITH NP NIL DET THE N HIFE NUPlBER SG BEL NIL RELPBO WHO VP HTL TBS PRESENT VQICE ACTIVE V BE <-ADJHXL BIG COMP-SUP GOPIPARATI VE THAN-PH NIL IP HIL PRO HE VP MIL TIS PRf SENT VOICE ACTIVE v GO PP HIL TO > NP NIL > NPR VIENR& > PP %IIL UITH > NP HIL > DET A > N WOMAP > BUHBER SG > BEL NIL > RELP30 WE0 > VP NIL > TtJS > PRESENT > VOICE ACTIVE > B BE > <-ADJHIL SEALL > COBP-SUP COMPlIIRhTIVE > THAN-PH NIL > HP NIL > PRO HE > BI HE I ASSUfiE YOU aEAN THE BAN > IS THAT CORRECT?
* I!
> <==> > Ii 8lIi > HUEIBE'II, SG > <-DEFINITETHE > <-DESCMITE > rt WIPE > NUFIBEB SG > <-DEPIBITETHE > <==> > I4 WIPE > NUHBER SG > <-DEPIHITETHE > PRESENT > <-HAVE-PROP > BIG > <-COBPAR ED-TO> N MAN > NUHBEB SG > <-DEFINITETHE > > > > > > > PRESENT <-BOVE <-SOURCESOMEPLACE <-DESTXZ4ATIONrJPB VIENNA <-CQ-AGENTPJ EIOflAN NUMBER SG <-INDEFINITEA <==> N WOMAN HUMBER SG <-INDBFINITEA PEE SENT <-HAVE-PRQP SHALL <-COMPARED-TON MAN NUMBER SG <-DEFINITETHE Pred loved the 1 woman before he came to Canada, Many cases can appear as embedded sentences as well as prepositional phrases.
Pronoun references within sentences can be resolved.
Pred played Jack tennis.
Sone verbs allow the co-agent case to appear in this form.
The music played loudly from the small room.
> PBRSE: > S > BIP MIL > DET THE > ti MUSIC BUflBER SG VP NIL TBS PAST VOICE ACTIVE V PLAT <-ADVBIL LOUD PP NIL FROB NP PjIL DET THE H BOOB BUHBEB SG <-ADJSHALL <==> SOHEONE PAST <-PLAY N MUSIC NUMBER SG <-DEFINITETHE <-SOURCEIi R00H lUPlBER SG <-&DJSMALL <-DEFINITETHE <-BDVLOUD It is idiotic that Fred vent to India to play football.
PARSE: s VP NIL PRO IT SUBJ OBJ RUHBER SG VP IIL THS PRESENT VOICE ACTIVE V BE <-ADJNIL IDIOTIC THAT-COHP NIL <==> NPB FRED PAST <HOVE <-SOUaCESOREPLACE <-DESTIl?ATIONNPB INDIA <-PURPOSE<==> NPR FRED PR ES EMT <-PLAY B FOOTBALL NUMBER SG <==> <z=> NPR FRED PAST <-HOVE <SOUBCESOMEPLACE <-DESTf RBTIONHPB INDIA <-PU RPOSE<==> NPR FRED PRESERT <-=PLAY N FOOTBALL %UMBER SG PRESENT <-HaVE-PROP IDIOTIC There is a small.
pen in that box, The "there ism construct is a special case of "to be," The house with the piano in it was given to Fred by his wife.
PARSE: S NP IIL D'E'T THE N HOUSE auama SG PP NIL MITE WE' NIL DET THE bl PIANO BUPIBER SG PP BfL IN NP NIL PRO IT SUBJ OBJ IdU2JBER SG VP HIL TllS PAST VOICE PASSIVE V GIVE PP NIL TO VP MIL NPR FRED PP PIL BY NP NIL DET POSSPBO HIS bl UXPE NUHBER SG BY BIS I ASSfJEE YOU MEAB FRED IS THAT CORRECT?
<==> 24 WIPE BUl!lBER SG <-POSS-BYFRED PAST <-TRAHSFER XJ HOUSE NUMBER SG <-DEFINITETHE <==> N HOUSE IDHBEB SG <-DEFINITETHE PRESENT <COHTAIN N PIANO NULIBEB SG <-DEFINITETHE > > > > > <-RECLPI EHT> NPR FRED > <-SOURCE> N RIFE > NUMBER SG > <POSS-BYFRED > > 5.
4gaphoric References Anaphoric references are resolved in the case analysis part of the systea.
As the system is developed around a specific aomain or data base, these routines will be modified to give them .ore power.
Currently they work solely by looking at the previous sentences.
Resolution of anaphoric references fits very well into a case system.
Since a pronoan is only eacountered in a search for a particular case, this gives the anaphoric routines a great deal of infornation about what kind of referent to look for, Here we will give just a brief outline of a fairly intricate pr ocedare, When a pronoun is found in the sentence, it triggers a call to the function AI1PBOBfC.
ABAPHORIC takes four arguments: 1, A list of cases to look for, 2,2 A test that the referent must pass, 3.
B number indicating hov far back in the history to look, Q.
The pronoun referenced, The search is breadth first, in that the program tries very hard to find the referent in the earliest possible sentence.
Fhe test is an arbitrary fosm.
SBOULD-BE and RUST-BE elements of the test are shut off on failure as they are in the rest of the back-up procedure.
Say, for instance, that the system is given the sentence: (12) He played the piano, The call to AGENT uould be the form: (AGENT (&HD (SHOULD-BE IlUSLCIAN) (BUST-BE HUHAN) ) ) . Since the obvious candidate for the agent is a pronoon, AHAPHORIC uould be invoked, Its TEST would be: (AID (SHOULD-BE BUSLCIAN) (RUST-BE HUHAH) 11, ANAPHOBIC would look back through the parses and p-parses of the recent sentences which are kept as global variables, ldoking for a noan phrase that ail1 pass this test, As it becomes aote and re desperate it will make the test less strict.
Since %eta is the pronoun, ABAPEORIC is smart enough to insist that the referent be male.
Host pronoun references within a sentence itself can also be resolved.
For instance: ($3) _I_C_ Fred went to London so he could visit the queen.
(14) Ja& took you up in airplane.
Beferences to events ana places can also be handled: (15) It was anfostonate that the children were killed[ 161 I went to Prance.
Ftetl lives there.
The resolution of locat ional references ("herea and thereu) is a difficult proble..
811 treating stherern as a pronoun whose referent aast be a location, Wtherew Is handled fairly well by the system, 'Here" is mach more difficult, since its resolution is highly context dependent.
another dPff icult problea is illustrated by sentence (17), (I)?
Harp. was aboard the Titanic when she sank.
Phis sentence is aabigooas: Mary could hare sunk in a sviaminq pool while she was on the ~itanic, bat this is probably not the intanlied meaning.
If wto sink" is defined with a test like (SHOULD-BE BOAT) m rfU pick up "Titanicn correctly.
Its first u tZmiUdate is *larym, however; thus if the test does ra out, the qsteim will choose her as its initial Qm-fi;S~ This illnstrates a difficulty with the current system's anaphoric routines, The first candidate found which passes the test is chosen, rather than all of the candidates being looked at, and the most likely accepted, In sn~mary, then, what we have implemented is a powerful parser for English sentences.
It eaploys case frames to discore2 the intended meaning of the verb, then continues to use case in its analysis of the rest of the sentence.
Each case has one ofr more tests associated with it, and each verb can add further tests to the cases in its case frames.
These tests are gradually veakened on failure, giving the careful user complete control over the back-up.
The system is carefully structured to allow easy extension or aodification.
As more world knowledge is added to the systen, the tests on th& cases, and in the case frames can be made to enploy this knowledge, thus naking them aore selective.
The structure building routines are coapletely general, allowing the user to retarn any strncture he desires within the constzaints of the general knowledge he puts into the systea.
tie feel that this system illustrates the siaplicity, tlexibility, and expressive power of case in applications in zo~putational linguistics, References 1.
Bruce, Bertram.
Vase Systems for Natural Lahguage".
Computer Science Departaent, Rut gers, CBfl-TT-31, 1974 2.
~elce-lurcia, fl.
nParadigns for Sentence Recognitionn, in System Developement Corp.
Final Report No, HRT15092/7907, 1972 3, Fillmore, ~harles.
"The Case for CaseM in Bac h and Harnts ((eds)., Universals &g Liqnisitic Theory.
New York: Holt, Rinebart, and U'inston, 1968, 1-90.
4. Hartin, Pilliam A, "Translation of English into flAPL Using Yinograd's Syntax, State Transition Networks, and a Semantic Case Grammarn Automatic Progranming Group Internal Hemo 11, HIT Project BAC, 1973 5, Schank, 8, C.
*Conceptual Dependancy: A Theory of Natural Language UnderstandingN Coqnitive Psycholoqp 3,4 (1972) 552-631 6.
Schank R.
C* 8 *Identification of Conceptualizations~ Underlying Natural Languagen in Schank and CoEbp(eds,), ConPntef aodels pf Thonqht and Lamuacre.
San Pransico: w.
H, Freeman 8 Co.
1973, 187-247 7, Siaaons, B, F, t'Sernantic Networks: Their Computation and Use for Understanding Engl Lsh Sentencesn in schank and Colby 1973, 63-113 8.
Taylor, Brock fl.
"B Case-Driven Parsern.
unpublished Masters thesis, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 1975 9Winograd, T.
undeff~tandigg EgLd mguaqg, Neu York: Academic press, 1972 10, Winograd, Terry "A Procedur a1 Bodel of Language Understaading" in Schank and Colby, 1973, 152-196 11.
Woods, Y, A, "Transition Metwork Grammars for Natural Language Analysis" gotam, Vol 13 (Oct, 1970) 591-606 12, Woods, A Experimental Parsing System for Transition Network Gramnarsn, in Bustin (ed).
Utural Lanquaqe Pi:ocessipq Hew York: Algorithmics Press, 1973, "11-154

