1:29	Book Reviews Linguistic Structures Processing Linguistic Structures Processing Studies in Linguistics, Computational Linguistics, and Artificial Intelligence Antonio Zampolli, Editor North-Holland Publishing Co. , New York, 1977, 586 pp.
2:29	, $48.00, ISBN 0-444o85017-1.
3:29	This book is a collection of good articles.
4:29	It is not, however, a good collection of articles.
5:29	The only connection between them is that their authors all lectured at the International Summer School on Computational and Mathematical Linguistics at Pisa in 1974.
6:29	Each lecturer was asked to contribute a chapter to the book; some of the contributions were specifically written for it, while others are papers that the authors had published elsewhere.
7:29	Although each article is good by itself, the book as a whole lacks a common theme, a logical progression from one article to another, and a common level of background knowledge expected of the reader.
8:29	Three of the articles taken together make a good survey of computational linguistics: On natural language based computer systems by Stanley Petrick, Natural language understanding systems within the A1 paradigm by Yorick Wilks, and Five lectures on artificial intelligence by Terry Winograd.
9:29	Although the articles are three to five years old, the issues they discuss are still among the most active research topics today.
10:29	One strength is the variety of viewpoints on many of the same systems and issues.
11:29	One weakness is the skimpy treatment of semantic networks and related graphs: Winograd, for example, devotes two pages to them out of 123, while using eleven pages to reproduce the same SHRDLU dialog that he has been quoting for the past eight years.
12:29	One absurdity is the placement of these introductory articles near the end of the book because the chapters are listed alphabetically by their authors' last names.
13:29	Three tutorials on techniques are Synthesis of speech from unrestricted text by Jonathan Allen, Morphological and syntactic analysis by Martin Kay, and Lunar rocks in natural English by William Woods.
14:29	Allen's article is a short survey of the state of the art and current issues in speech synthesis.
15:29	Woods describes the various phases of the LUNAR system; he doesn't give enough detail to enable a beginner to build his own system, but he gives enough motivation and references to show someone where to go for further information.
16:29	Kay, however, buries the reader in detail, including 21 pages of traces from his parser.
17:29	Such detail is acceptable in a technical report, but an article of this sort should put more emphasis on the reasons for these techniques.
18:29	Some comparisons with the parsing methods of Petrick, Wilks, Winograd, and Woods would be especially useful since they are discussed elsewhere in the same book.
19:29	Two articles that relate computational questions to more general issues in linguistics and psychology are Scenes-and-frames semantics by Charles Fillmore and Cognition: The linguistic approach by David Hays.
20:29	Fillmore's article meanders for seventeen untitled sections: he presents a wealth of observations that a semantic theory must account for, but he never attempts to systematize his observations or present a tentative theory of his own.
21:29	Hays, on the other hand, has a short, tightly organized discussion of the psychological implications of cognitive networks.
22:29	But his article is so vague and devoid of examples that it is hardly more than an extended abstract.
23:29	Four other papers, 'The position of embedding transformations in a grammar" revisited by Emmon Bach, Focus and negation by Eva Haji~owi, Some observations concerning the differences between sentence and text by Ferenc Kiefer, and John is easy to please by Barbara Partee, treat theoretical points in linguistics that are also important computationally.
24:29	Yet none of the authors cite any computational or AI work in their bibliographies or make any attempt to relate their issues to computational methods.
25:29	These four articles illustrate a frequent failing of interdisciplinary conferences: the speakers talk past one another without ever reconciling their vocabularies or coming to grips with common issues.
26:29	(In their more recent work, Bach and Partee and their graduate students have been combining Montague American Journal of Computational Linguistics, Volume 6, Number 1, January-March 1980 47 Book Reviews Automated Theorem Proving grammar and purely linguistic theory with parsing techniques; it is a pity that their articles in this book make no suggestion of such a combination).
27:29	In summary, this book is not systematic enough for an introductory text, and it surveys too much familiar work for a research collection.
28:29	Although the book is not suitable as a primary textbook, parts of it would make good supplementary reading for a course in AI or computational linguistics.
29:29	John F. Sowa, IBM Systems Research Institute

