1:26	Book Reviews Natural Language Processing Harry Tennant Petrocelli Books, Princeton, 1981, 276 pp.
2:26	, Paperback, $17.50, ISBN 089433-100-0.
3:26	(Dist: Van Nostrand-Reinhold, New York) How do computers understand natural language?
4:26	This question is asked by interested lay persons as well as computer scientists who are not familiar with artificial intelligence.
5:26	This book provides the reader with an introduction to the field and the general flavor of many natural language processing programs.
6:26	The emphasis is on the positive results that have been attained and general methods that are frequently employed.
7:26	The book opens with motivations for natural language research: many practical advantages for user interfaces and understanding the human mind.
8:26	Subsequent chapters deal mainly with the first motivation.
9:26	A description of a simple natural language processor is the vehicle used to introduce the concept of semantic nets, rudimentary syntactic and semantic analysis, and the inherently ambiguous nature of natural language.
10:26	Chapter 2 surveys a variety of early natural language processing programs, including BASEBALL, SADSAM, SYNTHEX, STUDENT, DEACON, and DOCTOR.
11:26	Unfortunately, no rigorous analysis of the limitations of these programs is presented, other than noting the limited computing technology available at the time and the necessary failure of a word-by-word translation approach.
12:26	Chapter 3 is devoted to syntax, using BNF notation, transition networks, surface structure, deep structure and transformations (though no mention of Chomsky!), followed by discussions of top-down, bottom-up and hybrid parsing schemes.
13:26	Chapters 4 and 5 present semantics.
14:26	Chapter 4 is an excellent introduction to the types of problems a semantic component of a natural language processor must address.
15:26	For the person who has not thought deeply about the nature of natural language, the examples clearly distinguish problems such as multiple word senses, modifier attachment, noun-noun modification, pronouns, determiners, ellipses, and substitution.
16:26	Case frames and concept decomposition are presented as means for dealing with these problems.
17:26	Chapter 5 is a large collection of brief descriptions of implemented semantic analyzers: Air Line Guide, ROBOT, Preference Semantics, SOPHIE, LIFER, Linguistic String Project, PLANES, RENDEZVOUS, and ELI.
18:26	Each semantic analyzer is presented independently; no analysis of strengths and weaknesses is given.
19:26	The notion of frames is presented in Chapter 5, along with a good discussion of understanding as a memory-based process and the close coupling of natural language processing and knowledge representation.
20:26	Throughout the first six chapters, natural language understanding is presented as single sentence understanding.
21:26	The final chapter, however, addresses discourse analysis: speech acts, rules for discourse and the difference between the rules for spoken and written dialog.
22:26	I would recommend this book to the general reader as a comprehensive introduction to natural language processing that does not get bogged down with details and the inner workings of particular implementations.
23:26	The reader will come away with an understanding of both the enormous problems natural language understanding researchers must address and the many generally accepted methods of attacking these problems.
24:26	The reader will not, however, be provided with underlying linguistic theory, a unifying historical perspective or an analysis of inadequacies.
25:26	Although the book is flawed by a lack of theory and the use of formalisms, such as semantic nets and BNF, without definition, it might be a good text for a stand-alone introductory undergraduate AI course, if it is supplemented with further readings and lectures that provide more depth.
26:26	Sharon C. Salveter, SUNY Stony Brook

