Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of the ACL, pages 33–36, New York, June 2006.
c©2006 Association for Computational Linguistics Answering the Question You Wish They Had Asked: The Impact of Paraphrasing for Question Answering Pablo Ariel Duboue IBM T.J.
Watson Research Center 19 Skyline Drive Hawthorne, NY 10532, USA duboue@us.ibm.com Jennifer Chu-Carroll IBM T.J.
Watson Research Center 19 Skyline Drive Hawthorne, NY 10532, USA jencc@us.ibm.com Abstract State-of-the-art Question Answering (QA) systems are very sensitive to variations in the phrasing of an information need.
Finding the preferred language for such a need is a valuable task.
We investigate that claim by adopting a simple MTbased paraphrasing technique and evaluating QA system performance on paraphrased questions.
We found a potential increase of 35% in MRR with respect to the original question.
1 Introduction
In a typical Question Answering system, an input question is analyzed to formulate a query to retrieve relevant documents from a target corpus (ChuCarroll et al., 2006; Harabagiu et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2006).
This analysis of the input question affects the subset of documents that will be examined and ultimately plays a key role in determining the answers the system chooses to produce.
However, most existing QA systems, whether they adopt knowledge-based, statistical, or hybrid methods, are very sensitive to small variations in the question form, often yielding substantially different answers for questions that are semantically equivalent.
For example, our system’s answer to “Who invented the telephone?” is “Alexander Graham Bell;” however, its top answer to a paraphrase of the above question “Who is credited with the invention of the telephone?” is “Gutenberg,” who is credited with the invention of the printing press, while “Alexander Graham Bell,” who is credited with the invention of the telephone, appears in rank four.
To demonstrate the ubiquity of this phenomenon, we asked the aforementioned two questions to several QA systems on the web, including LCC’s PowerAnswer system,1 MIT’s START system,2 AnswerBus,3 and Ask Jeeves.4 All systems exhibited different behavior for the two phrasings of the question, ranging from minor variations in documents presented to justify an answer, to major differences such as the presence of correct answers in the answer list.
For some systems, the more complex question form posed sufficient difficulty that they chose not to answer it.
In this paper we focus on investigating a high risk but potentially high payoff approach, that of improving system performance by replacing the user question with a paraphrased version of it.
To obtain candidate paraphrases, we adopt a simple yet powerful technique based on machine translation, which we describe in the next section.
Our experimental results show that we can potentially achieve a 35% relative improvement in system performance if we have an oracle that always picks the optimal paraphrase for each question.
Our ultimate goal is to automatically select from the set of candidates a high potential paraphrase using a component trained against the QA system.
In Section 3, we present our initial approach to paraphrase selection which shows that, despite the tremendous odds against selecting performance-improving paraphrases, our conservative selection algorithm resulted in marginal improvement in system performance.
1http://www.languagecomputer.com/demos 2http://start.csail.mit.edu 3http://www.answerbus.com 4http://www.ask.com 33 (A) What toxins are most hazardous to expectant mothers? en→it Che tossine sono più peri-colose alle donne incinte? it→en Which toxins are more dangerous to the pregnant women?
(B) Find out about India’s nuclear weapons program.
en→es Descubra sobre el programa de las armas nucleares de la India.
es→en Discover on the program of the nuclear weapons of India.
Figure 1: Example of lexical and syntactical paraphrases via MT-paraphrasing using Babelfish.
2 MT-Based Automatic Paraphrasing To measure the impact of paraphrases on QA systems, we seek to adopt a methodology by which paraphrases can be automatically generated from a user question.
Inspired by the use of parallel translations to mine paraphrasing lexicons (Barzilay and McKeown, 2001) and the use of MT engines for word sense disambiguation (Diab, 2000), we leverage existing machine translation systems to generate semantically equivalent, albeit lexically and syntactically distinct, questions.
Figure 1 (A) illustrates how MT-based paraphrasing captures lexical paraphrasing, ranging from obtaining simple synonyms such as hazardous and dangerous to deriving more complex equivalent phrases such as expectant mother and pregnant woman.
In addition to lexical paraphrasing, some two-way translations achieve structural paraphrasing, as illustrated by the example in Figure 1 (B).
Using multiple MT engines can help paraphrase diversity.
For example, in Figure 1 (B), if we use the @promt translator5 for English-to-Spanish translation and Babelfish6 for Spanish-to-English translation, we get “Find out on the nuclear armament program of India” where both lexical and structural paraphrasings are observed.
The motivation of generating an array of lexically and structurally distinct paraphrases is that some of these paraphrases may better match the processing capabilities of the underlying QA system than the original question and are thus more likely to produce correct answers.
Our observation is that while the paraphrase set contains valuable performanceimproving phrasings, it also includes a large number of ungrammatical sentences which need to be fil5http://www.online-translator.com 6http://babelfish.altavista.com Q&A System Question Answer List Paraphrase Selection Feature Extractor paraphrase...
paraphrase paraphrase paraphrase ...
paraphrase paraphrase paraphrase MT Paraphraser Figure 2: System Architecture.
tered out to reduce negative impact on performance.
3 Using
Automatic Paraphrasing in Question Answering We use a generic architecture (Figure 2) that treats a QA system as a black box that is invoked after a paraphrase generation module, a feature extraction module, and a paraphrase selection module are executed.
The preprocessing modules identifies a paraphrase of the original question, which could be the question itself, to send as input to the QA system.
A key advantage of treating the core QA system as a black box is that the preprocessing modules can be easily applied to improve the performance of any QA system.7 We described the paraphrase generation module in the previous section and will discuss the remaining two modules below.
Feature Extraction Module.
For each possible paraphrase, we compare it against the original question and compute the features shown in Table 1.
These are a subset of the features that we have experimented with and have found to be meaningful for the task.
All of these features are required in or7In our earlier experiments, we adopted an approach that combines answers to all paraphrases through voting.
These experiments proved unsuccessful: in most cases, the answer to the original question was amplified, both when right and wrong.
34 Feature Description Intuition Sum IDF The sum of the IDF scores for all terms in the original question and the paraphrase.
Paraphrases with more informative terms for the corpus at hand should be preferred.
Lengths Number of query terms for each of the para-phrase and the original question.
We expect QA systems to prefer shorter para-phrases.
Cosine Distance The distance between the vectors of both questions, IDF-weighted.
Certain paraphrases diverge too much from the original.
Answer Types Whether answer types, as predicted by our question analyzer, are the same or overlap.
Choosing a paraphrase that does not share an answer type with the original question is risky.
Table 1: Our features, computed for each paraphrase by comparing it against the original question.
der not to lower the performance with respect to the original question.
They are ordered by their relative contributions to the error rate reduction.
Paraphrase Selection Module.
To select a paraphrase, we used JRip, the Java re-implementation of ripper (Cohen, 1996), a supervised rule learner in the Weka toolkit (Witten and Frank, 2000).
We initially formulated paraphrase selection as a three-way classification problem, with an attempt to label each paraphrase as being “worse,” the “same,” or “better” than the original question.
Our objective was to replace the original question with a paraphrase labeled “better.” However, the priors for these classes are roughly 30% for “worse,” 65% for “same,” and 5% for “better”.
Our empirical evidence shows that successfully pinpointing a “better” paraphrase improves, on average, the reciprocal rank for a question by 0.5, while erroneously picking a “worse” paraphrase results in a 0.75 decrease.
That is to say, errors are 1.5 times more costly than successes (and five times more likely).
This scenario strongly suggests that a high precision algorithm is critical for this component to be effective.
To increase precision, we took two steps.
First, we trained a cascade of two binary classifiers.
The first one classifies “worse” versus “same or better,” with a bias for “worse.” The second classifier has classes “worse or same” versus “better,” now with a bias towards “better.” The second step is to constrain the confidence of the classifier and only accept paraphrases where the second classifier has a 100% confidence.
These steps are necessary to avoid decreasing performance with respect to the original question, as we will show in the next section.
4 Experimental
Results We trained the paraphrase selection module using our QA system, PIQUANT (Chu-Carroll et al., 2006).
Our target corpus is the AQUAINT corpus, employed in the TREC QA track since 2002.
As for MT engines, we employed Babelfish and Google MT,8 rule-based systems developed by SYSTRAN and Google, respectively.
We adopted different MT engines based on the hypothesis that differences in their translation rules will improve the effectiveness of the paraphrasing module.
To measure performance, we trained and tested by cross-validation over 712 questions from the TREC 9 and 10 datasets.
We paraphrased the questions using the four possible combinations of MT engines with up to 11 intermediate languages, obtaining a total of 15,802 paraphrases.
These questions were then fed to our system and evaluated per TREC answer key.
We obtained a baseline MRR (top five answers) of 0.345 running over the original questions.
An oracle run, in which the best paraphrase (or the original question) is always picked would yield a MRR of 0.48.
This potential increase is substantial, taking into account that a 35% improvement separated the tenth participant from the second in TREC-9.
Our three-fold cross validation using the features and algorithm described in Section 3 yielded a MRR of 0.347.
Over 712 questions, it replaced 14, two of which improved performance, the rest stayed the same.
On the other hand, random selection of paraphrases decreased performance to 0.156, clearly showing the importance of selecting a good paraphrase.
8http://translate.google.com 35 5 Related Work Most of the work in QA and paraphrasing focused on folding paraphrasing knowledge into the question analyzer or the answer locator (Rinaldi et al., 2003; Tomuro, 2003).
Our work, on the contrary, focuses on question paraphrasing as an external component, independent of the QA system architecture.
Some authors (Dumais et al., 2002; Echihabi et al., 2004) considered the query sent to a search engine as a “paraphrase” of the original natural language question.
For instance, Echihabi et al.(2004) presented a large number of “reformulations” that transformed the query into assertions that could match the answers in text.
Here we understand a question paraphrase as a reformulation that is itself a question, not a search engine query.
Other efforts in using paraphrasing for QA (Duclaye et al., 2003) focused on using the Web to obtain different verbalizations for a seed relation (e.g., Author/Book); however, they have yet to apply their learned paraphrases to QA.
Recently, there has been work on identifying paraphrases equivalence classes for log analysis (Hedstrom, 2005).
Hedstrom used a vector model from Information Retrieval that inspired our cosine measure feature described in Section 3.
6 Conclusions
The work presented here makes contributions at three different levels.
First, we have shown that potential impact of paraphrasing with respect to QA performance is significant.
Replacing a question with a more felicitously worded question can potentially result in a 35% performance increase.
Second, we performed our experiments by tapping into a readily available paraphrase resource: MT engines.
Our results speak of the usefulness of the approach in producing paraphrases.
This technique of obtaining a large, although low quality, set of paraphrases can be easily employed by other NLP practitioners wishing to investigate the impact of paraphrasing on their own problems.
Third, we have shown that the task of selecting a better phrasing is amenable to learning, though more work is required to achieve its full potential.
In that respect, the features and architecture discussed in Section 3 are a necessary first step in that direction.
In future work, we are interested in developing effective filtering techniques to reduce our candidate set to a small number of high precision paraphrases, in experimenting with state-of-the-art paraphrasers, and in using paraphrasing to improve the stability of the QA system.
Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank Nelson Correa and Annie Ying for helpful discussions and comments.
This work was supported in part by the Disruptive Technology Office (DTO)’s Advanced Question Answering for Intelligence (AQUAINT) Program under contract number H98230-04-C-1577.
References Regina Barzilay and Kathleen R.
McKeown. 2001.
Extracting paraphrases from a parallel corpus.
In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-EACL 2001), Toulouse, France, July.
Jennifer Chu-Carroll, Pablo A.
Duboue, John M.
Prager, and Krzysztof Czuba.
2006. IBM’s piquant II in TREC 2005.
In E.
M. Voorhees and Lori P.
Buckland, editors, Proceedings of the Fourthteen Text REtrieval Conference Proceedings (TREC 2005), Gaithersburg, MD, USA.
William Cohen.
1996. Learning trees and rules with set-valued features.
In Proceedings of the 14th joint American Association for Artificial Intelligence and IAAI Conference (AAAI/IAAI-96), pages 709–716.
American Association for Artificial Intelligence.
Mona Diab.
2000. An unsupervised method for word sense tagging using parallel corpora: A preliminary investigation.
In Special Interest Group in Lexical Semantics (SIGLEX) Workshop, Association for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, October.
Florence Duclaye, Francois Yvon, and Olivier Collin.
2003. Learning paraphrases to improve a question-answering system.
In EACL 2003, 11th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Workshop in NLP for QA, Budapest, Hungary, April.
S. Dumais, M.
Banko, E.
Brill, J.
Lin, and A.
Ng. 2002.
Web question answering: is more always better?
In Proc.
SIGIR ’02, pages 291–298, New York, NY, USA.
ACM Press.
A. Echihabi, U.Hermjakob, E.
Hovy, D.
Marcu, E.
Melz, and D.
Ravichandran. 2004.
Multiple-engine question answering in textmap.
In Proc.
TREC 2003.
S. Harabagiu, D.
Moldovan, C.
Clark, M.
Bowden, A.
Hickl, and P.
Wang. 2006.
Employing two question answering systems.
In Proc.
TREC 2005.
Anna Hedstrom.
2005. Question categorization for a question answering system using a vector space model.
Master’s thesis, Department of Linguistics and Philology (Language Technology Programme) Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Fabio Rinaldi, James Dowdall, Kaarel Kaljurand, Michael Hess, and Diego Mollá.
2003. Exploiting paraphrases in a question answering system.
In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Paraphrasing, pages 25–32, July.
R. Sun, J.
Jiang, Y.F.
Tan, H.
Cui, T.-S.
Chua, and M.-Y.
Kan. 2006.
Using syntactic and semantic relation analysis in question answering.
In Proc.
TREC 2005.
Noriko Tomuro.
2003. Interrogative reformulation patterns and acquisition of question paraphrases.
In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Paraphrasing, pages 33–40, July.
Ian H.
Witten and Eibe Frank.
2000. Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques with Java Implementations.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 36

