Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2007, Companion Volume, pages 189–192, Rochester, NY, April 2007.
c©2007 Association for Computational Linguistics Modifying SO-PMI for Japanese Weblog Opinion Mining by Using a Balancing Factor and Detecting Neutral Expressions Guangwei Wang Graduate School of Information Science and Technology Hokkaido University Sapporo, Japan 060-0814 wgw@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp Kenji Araki Graduate School of Information Science and Technology Hokkaido University Sapporo, Japan 060-0814 araki@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp Abstract We propose a variation of the SO-PMI algorithm for Japanese, for use in Weblog Opinion Mining.
SO-PMI is an unsupervised approach proposed by Turney that has been shown to work well for English.
We first used the SO-PMI algorithm on Japanese in a way very similar to Turney’s original idea.
The result of this trial leaned heavily toward positive opinions.
We then expanded the reference words to be sets of words, tried to introduce a balancing factor and to detect neutral expressions.
After these modifications, we achieved a wellbalanced result: both positive and negative accuracy exceeded 70%.
This shows that our proposed approach not only adapted the SO-PMI for Japanese, but also modified it to analyze Japanese opinions more effectively.
1 Introduction
Recently, more and more websites add information in the form of personal opinions to the Web, e.g. customer reviews of products, forums, discussion groups, and blogs.
Here, we use the term Weblog for these sites.
This type of information is often useful.
However, we have to deal with an enormous amount of unstructured and/or semi-structured data.
These data are subjective, in free format and mostly textual, thus using them is difficult and time consuming.
Therefore, how to mine the Weblog opinions automatically more effectively has attracted more and more attention (Gamon, 2005; Popescu, 2005; Chaovalit, 2005).
Turney (2002) has presented an unsupervised opinion classification algorithm called SO-PMI (Semantic Orientation Using Pointwise Mutual Information).
The main use of SO-PMI is to estimate the semantic orientation (i.e.
positive or negative) of a phrase by measuring the hits returned from a search engine of pairs of words or phrases, based on the mutual information theory.
This approach has previously been successfully used on English.
The average accuracy was 74% when evaluated on 410 reviews from Epinions1.
However, according to our preliminary experiment, directly translating Turney’s original idea into Japanese gave a very slanted result, with a positive accuracy of 95% and a negative accuracy of only 8%.
We found that the balance between the positive and negative sides is influenced greatly by the page hits of reference words/sets, since a search engine is used.
Therefore, we introduced a balancing factor according for the difference in occurrence between positive and negative words.
And then we added several threshold rules to detect neutral expressions.
The proposed approach is evaluated on 200 positive and 200 negative Japanese opinion sentences and yielded a well-balanced result.
In the remainder of this paper, we review the SOPMI Algorithm in Section 2, then adapt the SO-PMI for Japanese and present the modifications in Section 3.
In section 4, we evaluate and discuss the experimental results.
Section 5 gives concluding remarks.
2 Details
of the SO-PMI Algorithm The SO-PMI algorithm (Turney, 2002) is used to estimate the semantic orientation (SO) of a phrase by 1http://www.epinions.com 189 References Peter D.
Turney. 2002.
Thumbs up or thumbs down?
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
Proceedings 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp.
417-424. Popescu, Ana-Maria, and Oren Etzioni.
2005. Extracting Product Features and Opinions from Reviews.
Proceedings of HLT-EMNLP.
Michael Gamon, Anthony Aue, Simon Corston-Oliver and Eric K.
Ringger. 2005.
Pulse: Mining Customer Opinions from Free Text.
Proceedings of the 2005 Conference on Intelligent Data Analysis (IDA), pp.121-132.
Pimwadee Chaovalit and Lina Zhou.
2005. Movie Review Mining: a Comparison between Supervised and Unsupervised Classification Approaches.
Proceedings of the 38th Annual HICSS.
Nozomi Kobayashi, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsumoto, Kenji Tateishi and Toshikazu Fukushima.
2003. Collecting evaluative expressions by a text mining technique.
IPSJ SIG NOTE, Vol.154, No.12, In Japanese.
Taku Kudoh and Yuji Matsumoto.
2002. Applying Cascaded Chunking to Japanese Dependency Structure Analysis.
Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ)Academic Journals, Vol 43, No 6, pp.
1834-1842, In Japanese.
Guangwei Wang and Kenji Araki.
2006. A Decision Support System Using Text Mining Technology.
IEICE SIG Notes WI2-2006-6, pp. 55-56.

