NAACL HLT Demonstration Program, pages 19–20, Rochester, New York, USA, April 2007.
c©2007 Association for Computational Linguistics OMS-J: An Opinion Mining System for Japanese Weblog Reviews Using a Combination of Supervised and Unsupervised Approaches Guangwei Wang Graduate School of Information Science and Technology Hokkaido University Sapporo, Japan 060-0814 wgw@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp Kenji Araki Graduate School of Information Science and Technology Hokkaido University Sapporo, Japan 060-0814 araki@media.eng.hokudai.ac.jp Abstract We introduce a simple opinion mining system for analyzing Japanese Weblog reviews called OMS-J.
OMS-J is designed to provide an intuitive visual GUI of opinion mining graphs for a comparison of different products of the same type to help a user make a quick purchase decision.
We first use an opinion mining method using a combination of supervised (a Naive Bayes Classifier) and unsupervised (an improved SO-PMI: Semantic Orientation Using Pointwise Mutual Information) learning.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, there are numerous Web sites containing personal opinions, e.g. customer reviews of products, forums, discussion groups, and blogs.
Here, we use the term Weblog for these sites.
How to extract and analyze these opinions automatically, i.e. “Opinion Mining”, has seen increasing attention in recent years.
This paper presents a simple opinion mining system (OMS-J) for analyzing Japanese Weblog reviews automatically.
The novelty of OMS-J is twofold: First, it provides a GUI using intuitive visual mining graphs aimed at inexperienced users who want to check opinions on the Weblog before purchasing something.
These graphs can help the user to make a quick decision on which product is suitable.
Secondly, this system combines a supervised and an unsupervised approach to perform opinion mining.
In related work (Chaovalit, 2005; Turney, 2002), both supervised and unsupervised approaches have been shown to have their pros and cons.
Based on the merits of these approaches and the characteristics of Japanese (Kobayashi, 2003), we proposed an opinion mining method using a Naive Bayes Classifier (supervised approach) and an improved SO-PMI method (unsupervised approach) to perform different parts of the classification task (Wang, 2006).
OMS-J implements Weblog opinion mining by the steps shown in Figure 1.
In the next section, we describe the proposed system in detail.
1. Information Search 2.
Weblog Content Extraction 3.
OpinionMining DB 4.
Mining GraphsGUIUser Search Engine (Google), KeywordLynx (Text Browser) Cabocha (Structure Analyzer)Template content extraction Feature ClassificationSupervised Approach (Naïve Bayes)P/N Classification Unsupervised Approach (SO-PMI) Figure 1: System Flow 2 Proposed System 2.1 Information Search The first step is information search.
We used the Google search engine1 to get all the information on one product category or one specific product in the Japanese weblog on the Internet.
The search keyword is the product category name or the product name.
The URL range of the search is restricted by the URL type (e.g.
blog, bbs, review).
2.2 Weblog
Content Extraction The Content Extraction step first analyzes the Weblog content using a dependency structure analyzer for Japanese, Cabocha2.
Based on the syntactic characteristics of Japanese reviews and the results 1http://www.google.co.jp/ 2http://www.chasen.org/∼taku/software/cabocha/ 19 of related work (Kobayashi, 2003; Taku, 2002), we designed the following templates to extract opinion phrases: < noun + auxiliary word + adj/ verb / noun >< adj+ noun / undefined / verb >< noun + verb > < noun + symbol + adj/ verb / noun >Except the above < adj> 2.3 Opinion Mining Opinion mining methods can usually be divided into two types: supervised and unsupervised approaches.
Supervised approaches are likely to provide more accurate classification results but need a training corpus.
Unsupervised approaches on the other hand require no training data but tend to produce weaker results.
We propose a combined opinion mining method by performing feature classification and P/N classification (Wang, 2006).
The purpose of these classifications is to know what the opinion expresses about a certain product’s features.
Feature means a product’s attribute, i.e. price, design, function or battery feature.
Based on our previous study, it is easy to create a feature corpus.
Therefore feature classification is performed by a supervised approach, a Naive Bayes Classifier.
P/N classification classifies reputation expressions into positive or negative meaning using an unsupervised approach, SO-PMI.
The SOPMI approach measures the similarity of pairs of words or phrases based on the mutual information theory, in our case the closeness of an opinion and words for ”good” or ”bad”.
No human effort is required when mining a new product or category.
Only inputting the name of the product or category is needed.
It does however require quite a lot of processing time, since the SOPMI approach using a search engine is very time consuming.
Adding new features requires manual work, since a small hand labeled training corpus is used.
Similar categories of products, for instance cameras and mp3 players, use the same features though, so this is not done very often.
2.4 Mining
Graphs GUI Finally, OMS-J provides a GUI with mining graphs showing the opinion mining data in the database, as shown in Figure 2.
These graphs show the distribution of positive and negative opinions of each feature type such as ”design”, and for each product.
The distribution of positive opinions among the different product choices are shown in a pie chart, as is the same for negative opinions.
This GUI can also show graphs for a single product’s mining results, showing the positive/negative opinion distribution of each feature.
Figure 2: OMS-J’s GUI Screenshot for One Product Category 3 Demonstration During the demonstration, we will show that OMSJ is an intuitive opinion mining system that can help people to make a quick decision on purchasing some product.
OMS-J’s trial version has been developed and tested with three kinds of products: Electronic Dictionaries, MP3 Players and Notebook PCs.
The experiment results were positive.
We will show how the system works when a user wants to buy a good MP3 player or wants to get a feel for the general opinions on a specific Notebook PC etc.
References Pimwadee Chaovalit and Lina Zhou.
2005. Movie Review Mining: a Comparison between Supervised and Unsupervised Classification Approaches.
Proceedings of the 38th Annual HICSS.
Peter D.
Turney. 2002.
Thumbs up or thumbs down?
Semantic orientation applied to unsupervised classification of reviews.
Proceedings 40th Annual Meeting of the ACL, pp.
417-424. Nozomi Kobayashi, Kentaro Inui, Yuji Matsumoto, Kenji Tateishi and Toshikazu Fukushima.
2003. Collecting evaluative expressions by a text mining technique.
IPSJ SIG NOTE, Vol.154, No.12.
Guangwei Wang and Kenji Araki.
2006. A Decision Support System Using Text Mining Technology.
IEICE SIG Notes WI2-2006-6, pp.
55-56. Taku Kudoh and Yuji Matsumoto.
2002. Applying Cascaded Chunking to Japanese Dependency Structure Analysis.
Information Processing Society of Japan (IPSJ)Academic Journals, Vol 43, No 6, pp. 1834-1842.

