Proceedings of NAACL HLT 2009: Demonstrations, pages 9–12,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c 2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
 STAT: Speech Transcription Analysis Tool 
Stephen A. Kunath 
Program in Linguistics 
3e4  George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA  22030 
skunath@gmu.edu
Steven H. Weinberger 
Program in Linguistics 
3e4  George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA  22030 
weinberg@gmu.edu
 
Abstract 
The Spech Transcription Analysi Tol 
(SAT) is an ope source tol for alignig 
and comprig tw phnticaly trnscribed 
texts f huan spec. Te outpt alysi is 
a parmetrized st of phnlogicl difer-
ences. Ths ifernces are based upon a se-
ltable st of binary phontic ftres uch s 
[voic], [cntiut], [igh], et. STA was 
initaly designed to provide sets of 
phological spch paterns in th compari-
sns f vrious English cets found in the 
Spech Acent Archive tp:/acet.gmu.edu, 
but its op ad utilty exnd to atrs of 
langage asesment, phontic trainig, fren-
sic liuistics, ad sec reogito. 
 
1 Introduction

The theoretical and practial value of studying 
uman acnted spech is of intrst  langae 
techers, liguist, and mputaioal inguist. It 
is also part of the resarch rgrm behind the 
Spech Acent Archive (tp:/acent.gmu.eu) 
housd at Gorge Mason University. The Archive 
is a growing datbse f Eglish spec varietis 
tht ctais more than 1,100 samls of ntive 
and no-ntive spkers reading fro the sam 
Eglish pargrah. Th no-ative spakrs of 
nlis come from ore ta 250 languge back-
grouds and include a varity of difert lvls of 
Enlish speh abiltis. The nativ samples dem-
ostrate th vrious dialcts of English spch 
frm round the wrl. Al samples iclude o-
netic trascriptions, phonlogicl gneralizations, 
dmogrphi ad gegraphi informtion. Fr 
cparison puros, te Archive als icludes 
phonetic sound inventories from ore than 20 
wrld langages o that rsearchers can perform 
various cotrstive nlys nd aetd sech 
studies.  
No mater how subtle an acent is, human lis-
tenrs cn imediately d utomaticaly otice 
that speakers ar ifrnt. Fr exple, Chins 
spekrs of English soud ifrnt from Frech 
saers f lis. The Spech Acent Arive 
stors and presnts dat tat sifes ad codifs 
thes spech difernces t he phonti segment 
lvl. Traine huma liguist cmare a standar 
spech smpl with phonetialy trscribe 
s sales from eac (-stndar or no-
native) spekr and istil from this lysi a set 
of phonlogicl spech paterns (PSs) for ch 
seaker. Esentialy, te tsk is to discver te 
prcis factors or feturs responsible for humans 
to ategorize say, a Vietnams sakr f English 
difrntly from  so-cled stndr lis 
speaker. While such anlys are theoreticaly and 
rctialy valble, te proces of cmpring two 
phoneticl trnscribd sh sales requires 
exlit rainig, is time-consuming, nd is dificlt 
to update. 
2 Phonological
Speech Patterns 
As an example of how e manualy derive the 
PSs for  no-native English speker, w bgin 
by cmparig the row ponetic transcriptio f 
a “standr” Nort America Eglish samle (1), 
with  represntaive no-ntive speaker of English 
(er a Vitmes spaker (2): 
(1) [pʰl̥iːz kʰɑlˠ stɛlə æskɚ ɾə bɹɪ̃ŋ ðiːz θɪ̃ŋz 
wɪθɚ fɹʌ̃m ðə stɔɹ sɪks pũ nz əv fɹɛʃ snoʊ 
pʰiiːz faɪːv θɪk sl̥æːbz əv bluː ʧiiːz æn meɪbi ə 
snæk˺ fɚ h bɹʌðɚ bɑːb wi ɑlˠso niː̃ɾə sɑlˠ 
pʰl̥ stɪk˺ sneɪk æ̃nə bɪːɡ tʰɔɪ fɹ̥ɑːɡ fɚ ðə kʰɪːdz 
9
ʃi kə̃n skʷuup˺ ðiːz θɪŋ̃z ɪ̃ntə θɹ̥ii ɹɛːd˺ bæːɡz 
æ̃ːn wi ɪlˠ ɡoʊ mit hɚ wɛ̃nzdeɪ æt˺ ðə tʰɹ̥eɪ̃n 
steɪʃə̃n] 
 
(2) [pli kolˠ stɛlɔ as xɜ ṯʊ bɹɪŋ ði θɪŋɡ̥s wɪd̪ xɜː 
fɹɔm ə st̪ɔː sɪxs puːn ɔf ɹɛʃ noʊ piːz faiθ t̪ɪk 
ə̆slæp˺ ɔβlu çiːs ẽn meɪbi ɛsnæk˺ fɔ xɜː bɹʌðə 
bɔʔ wi ɔlˠsɔ niːt ʔʌ psɔːlˠ plstɪk snex ɛnʌ 
bix tɔɪ fɹɔx fɔ ðə kiːs ʃi kʲẽːn skuʔ lɪ θʰɪŋɡ̥s ɪntʊ 
tɹiː ɹɛd̥ bæɣz̥ ɛn wĭ il ɡo mit˺ xɜ wɛnz̥deɪ a 
ðəs tɹeɪ̃n steɪʃɪn] 
 
Each of thes phonetic transcriptions are con-
struted by 3 to 4 traid liguist, ad isgree-
ments are stled by conses. As i the case with 
al such transcriptis, thy remain works in pro-
gres. Two f thes trained linguist d a ecil 
and paer rd-by-wor comparison of th two 
trscritions in (1) and (2). Their alysi of the 
dat may fid the folwig PSs listed in (3): 
(3) (a) final bstruent devoicg ([çiːs]) 
(b) no aspiration ([piːz]) 
(c) final consonat deltion ([pli]) 
(d) vowel penthesi ([ə̆slæp˺]) 
(e) substiutio f [x] for velars and glot-
tals ([ix]) 
This i just a partial ist. Some speakers may have 
more, and some spekers ay hv ls. But  
esntil clai hr is tht ec speaker’s English 
acet is the sum of teir PSs. 
Thre ar certain problems asociated with tis 
manual pros. Foremst aong thm is te cost 
d time t train liguist t perfr uniform PS 
anlys. Alyst mst know hat o lk for—
the must decide what is importnt and what 
sould be ignor. Tis brings us to the second 
drawack of manual nalysi: the lack f a quik 
n pretrized ethod f comprison. 
If resarchrs nd t test hythes about ad-
ditonal but uncatalogud PSs, or if they ned to 
simply search for  define subset f PSs, ai-
tional nul anlys ar cesary. A third prob-
lem pears i the proer seltion f one arbitray 
standar “bse” saml for the cmparisons. At 
times resarchrs ay want to ore on-
nativs wit Americn English ative sampls, ad 
t other ties thy may ed to core no-
natives with Britsh, or ther varietis of native 
Eglish. Tis requires multipl mnual cmpri-
sons, and they tak huan tie ad ergy. Fi-
aly, s mntioned bov, nrow phonetic 
trnscriptions ay  t e modifed as clabo-
rators ji the nalysi. But whn thes re 
chnged, ty cesitae concomitat cange in 
te rister of PSs. 
Automating P genration ot only solves 
thes prbles, but also pes up ew resarch 
posibiltis. 
 
3 An
Automated System: Research Poten-
tials 
We have devloped a computaional tol that wil 
automticaly copre tw phneticly-
trnscribed speh samls and genrat a set of 
PSs dscribing te spech ifrces. Automat-
ing the omparison ros wil be of great se to 
the arcive nd t ay spech scintist who tran-
scribs and alyzes okn language. It il low 
fast a pointed compariss of ny two phneti-
cly trnscrib sech samples. Istead f sim-
pl comparing a “standr” North Amricn ative 
seaker d  o-tive speaker, it wil be quit 
simpl to perfrm any acnt comparisons, in-
cluding ths betwe  tive Britsh Eglish 
speaker and a no-native speakr. It wil also be 
osibl to quickly d asily derive a compsit 
result. That is, after a number of anlyse, we can 
dtrmine wht  typicl Rusi speakr of Eg-
lish wil do it his vowels and consonts. This 
promise t be a great mpircl imprvemnt over 
the pronuncmnts that re urently oferd in 
t aedies of vrious ESL tacher-traiig 
textboks. 
Fr the anlysi of individual speakers, this tol 
has dirct use in maters of linguistic sesment. 
It wil be sfl i th filds f ESL pronuciatio 
asesmnt (Anderson-Hsieh, Johnson, ad Khler, 
192). Thes kis f assmets wil naturaly 
lead to a tory of weighted PSs.   
The tl als srvs as a fast and sytematic 
metod f checking humn trnscriptio acury 
and therby failtaes betr methods f phonetic 
trscription (Cuchirini, 196; Sriberg, Hik, 
& Trost-Stef, 1987). 
Finaly, the tol can provide a nede human 
factor dignostic t guide rsrch in spectro-
10
graphic spech anlysi. And because spech rec-
oniton ad speker idetifcation programs ust 
ultimately eal with ifrnt cetd spech, te 
reslts from th STA alyse wil contribut to 
this wrk (Bartkova & Jouvt, 207; Deshpande, 
Cikeru, & Gindraj, 205). 
 
4 System
Overview 
Linguist who transcribe spech into a phonetic 
represntain my us a tol su as PRAT, to 
lay th udio srce file nd a text editor to input 
the transcriptin. Th rsult is normaly a Uicode 
txt file that has n IPA trascriptin of the aui 
file. STA provides linguist with a easy wy to 
play back an auio srce file nd shre it ith 
other linguist. A key fatur that STA provides 
in adito to transcription tols i  mechanism to 
mge a crpus of hetic transcriptios. Oce a 
corpus of honetic transriptios is creatd, lin-
gist can use STA’s pholgical sph patern 
anlysi tols to describe difernes betwen dif-
fert speakers’ acnts. 
Th STA sytem icorprates evral distinct 
componets. Usrs interat with t sytem pri-
marily via  web itrfc. Al user interfacs are 
implented ith Ruby on Rails ad vrious 
JavScript libraies. Backed process n algo-
rithms are implnted in Jav. An ope source 
web plication bul icludig th frnt-nd 
 interfes ad ackend libraies wil be mae 
avilabl as n open sourc liry suital for us 
in other plicatis i the futre. We belive that 
the transcrition alignmnt and spch patrn 
anlysi ompets of STA make it a unique 
tol for linguist studying spech procses.  
4.1 Language
Mangement 
The language mangent componet of STA 
provides bsic trscribd audi crpus mange-
ment. This module alows  ser to define  ew 
spaker source langge, .g. Japnes, ad spcify 
atributs f th lua, e.. a honetic inven-
tory. Al transcriptions r thn asciatd with a 
speaker soure laguage. STA ofers robust 
srch apbiltis tht low a linguist  sarch y 
things uch as peaker demgrphics, phoneti in-
vetories, ponlogical spec rocess, and 
spch quality asesments. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: STA provides an iital lignment and aso-
ciatd Ps. Pri ligments ad PSs c be 
mnualy changed by a linuist, rcomputed, and ano-
taed. 
4.2 Transcription
Mangement 
Whenver a transcription is to be made by lin-
guist, a nw trsriti recrd is crt, aso-
ciated with a source languag, an the audio file is 
tch to te transription record. Onc the audio 
file as ben mde avilabl, linguist ar ble t 
us  w iterfac to ply the adio recording and 
creat phonti transcritions. Th trascriptio 
mngemt iterfe the alws a senior linguist 
to adjuicate difrncs beten trascriptions 
an selt n uthoritaive transcriptio. 
4.3 Transcription
Alignment and Analysi 
Once an authoritaive transcription for a speaker 
has b creatd  linguist an the cmr th 
trnscription with the previously transcribed 
speh f ater spakr. This alignmet pros 
is t core of th sytem. e first stag f the 
comparisn is to creat a word and phone lvl 
alignet betwen th t trscritis. The 
limnt is prformed by our speial implenta-
tion of Kondrak’s phonetic alignent algorithm 
(Kdrak, 20). Te utpt from this prt f te 
sytem is  complt phone-to-phne to alignmnt 
of two transritions. Figur 1 sows n exaple 
alignmet with PSs that  linguist is abl to mk 
djustnts to r mrk corect. After lignent a 
lingist ca perfr an ssment of the spakr’s 
spech biltis and mke othr tes. 
To elp linguist wh d work with a vriety of 
difernt laaes and resarch neds, te stings 
for th phonemic lustr prser, ponem distace 
measures, ad alignment algorithm cficent n 
11
be asily changed inside of STA. Linguist can 
also control th set of cnstraints used for the 
phnlgical spech paters lysi. 
 
4.4 Phonlogical
Spech Patern Aalysi 
Once the transcription alignment has ben com-
pltd, t pholgicl spc ptr alysi 
can begin. Tis anlysi evalutes al honetic dif-
fercs betwe the two transcriptis uner 
anlysi. Ths difrnces are the rocesd by 
our algoritm an usd to dtrmin unique 
phnlical spech paterns. Al potetial 
ologil s aters are returned t the 
linguist fr verifcation. As th sytm countrs 
ad stores more d more ponlogial spech 
ptern alys fr a particular laue, gnral 
dscriptions are mde bot peoples’ acnts from 
a prtiular lnguag ackgrund. 
5 Future
Work 
Our inital design of STA use manualy detr-
mied weights f phnolgical fetres us to 
align transcriptions ad etrmin phonlogical 
spech proess. I th nxt ajor relase of 
STA we intd to integrate automted mthods t 
pros ight setis bsd n language selc-
tins. 
We are curently planig on integrating a 
spectrogrphi alsi mechanism that wil low 
for the transcriptions to b tie syncronized ith 
the rigil sech sample. Aftr this w il be 
invstiating th integrtion f sevral speaker ac-
cet idetifcatio alorithms. W wil lso b in-
vstigating plictins f tis tol to help sech 
patholist in the idetifcatin ad assmnt of 
disrderd spec patrns. 
 
6 References

Anderson-Hsieh, J., Johnson, R., & Kohler, K. (192). 
Th relationsip betwe ative spakr judgments 
of no-ntive ronuciation d vince in sen-
tals, prosdy, ad sylable structr. Language 
Lernig, 42, 529-555. 
Bartkova, K., & Jouvet, D. (207). On using units 
trined on foreign dat for improved mltiple acet 
spch recgnito. Spech Cunication, 49, 836-
846. 
Cuchiarini, C. (196). Asesing transcription agree-
ment: methodlogical spcts. Cliil Liguistics & 
Phoetics, 10, 13-155. 
Despand, S., Chikeru, S., & Govindarju, V. 
(205). Acent clasifcation i spech. Procedings 
of the 4
th
 IE Workshp  Automati Identifatio 
Advancd Technlgies. 
Konrk, G. (2000). A nw algorithm for the alignment 
f phonetic sequeces. In Prcedings of the First 
Confer on North American Chapter f t Aso-
ciati Fr Cmputationl Linguistics (Seatle, 
Wshington, April 29 -May 04, 20). ACM Intr-
natioal Cfernce Proceding Seris, vol. 4. 
Mrgn Kaufma ublishrs, Sa Francis, CA, 
288-295. 
Shriberg, L., Hinke, R., & Trost-Stefn, C. (1987). A 
procdure to slct and train persos for narow pho-
neti transcription by cosesu. Clinicl Linguistics 
& Phoetis, 1, 71-189. 
 
12

