Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Student Research Workshop, pages 58–63,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Fine-Tuning in Brazilian Portuguese-English Statistical Transfer Ma-
chine Translation: Verbal Tenses 
 
 
Lucia Silva 
University of São Paulo 
Av. Prof. Luciano Gualberto, 403 
Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, BR 
helena.rozario@usp.br 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper describes an experiment designed 
to evaluate the development of a Statistical 
Transfer-based Brazilian Portuguese to Eng-
lish Machine Translation system. We compare 
the performance of the system with the inclu-
sion of new syntactic writen rules concerning 
verbal tense betwen the Brazilian Portuguese 
and English languages. Results indicate that 
the system performance improved compared 
with an initial version of the system. However 
significant adjustments remain to be done. 
1 Introduction

Recently, Statistical Machine Translation systems 
have received much atention because they are 
fuly automated and have shown significant im-
provements over other types of aproaches. Ex-
periments with string-to-string and syntax-based 
systems have shown beter results when linguistic 
features are aded to Machine Translation systems 
(Chiang et al., 209). The Statistical Transfer 
(Stat-XFER) aproach presented in this paper was 
designed as a Statistical aproach with a gramar 
module, which encodes syntactic transfer rules, 
i.e., rules which encode constituent structures from 
the source language to the target language struc-
ture. 
Verbal tenses vary among natural languages. 
Each language has its typical verbal form, and they 
share mod, voice, aspect and person qualities 
(Comrie, 193). Some languages, such as Portu-
guese and English do not share the same properties 
and the number of verbal tenses may present di-
vergences. Our goal is to test the development of 
the Statistical Transfer-based system under the 
aplication of syntactic transfer rules of verbal 
tenses involving this pair of languages. 
2 The
Statistical Transfer-based system 
The hybrid Stat-XFER system uses a transfer-
based method and statistical paradigm for the 
translation proces and it is composed of the fol-
lowing main components: the Bilingual Phrasal 
Lexicon, Morphology, Transfer Engine and the 
Decoder. Given one sentence in the source lan-
guage, this input wil go through al those compo-
nents until the system outputs a set of pairs 
maping candidate translations to probabilities. 
The Stat-XFER framework is shown in the figure 1 
below. 
 
Figure 1. The Stat-XFER framework 
58
Bilingual Phrasal Lexicon. The Portuguese-
English lexicon is made up of a word-level lexi-
con. The lexicon was automaticaly extracted from 
the EUROPARL corpus
1
 and in order to adjust it 
to this system’s neds, this lexicon has ben modi-
fied with new entries and deleted of the repeated 
entries. 
Morphology. The system uses the Jspel
2
 mor-
phology analyzer, which was developed by the 
Minho University in Portugal. Jspel produces al 
posible labels for a lexical entry in the input and it 
provides a stem for each word with a diferent la-
bel. Upon each sentence in the lexicon input, the 
Morphology Analyzer examines each lexical entry 
and performs its analysis. 
Transfer Engine. This component was devel-
oped by the AVENUE group from Carnegie Mel-
lon University (Probst et al., 202, Lavie et al., 
2003, Lavie et al., 204, Lavie 208) and aplies 
the lexical transfer rules specified by the Lexicon 
component, i.e. the lexical entries in Portuguese 
are substituted by their translations in English. 
This component also aplies the transfer gramar 
rules from Portuguese into English producing con-
stituents translated into the English structure. 
When the transfer stage has completed, we have a 
chart (hypergraph) in which each key contains an 
n-best beam for each non-terminal type of each 
source span. Each entry in the beam has a unifica-
tion feature structure and log-linear feature scores 
asociated with it. 
Before decoding, the chart is turned into a latice 
by removing hierarchical structure and respecting 
only the target-side ordering of the constituents 
produced by the gramar. The unification features 
and unification constraints on each rule can re-
move ungramatical hypotheses from the search 
space. 
Decoder. For each sentence, the Decoder does a 
monotonic left-to-right decoding on the Transla-
tion Latice with no reordering beyond what the 
gramar produced. For each source span, the de-
coder keps the n most likely hypotheses.  
3 Experiment

                                                             
1
 htp:/ww.statmt.org/europarl/ 
2
 htp:/linguateca.di.uminho.pt/webjspel/jsolhelp.pl 
Acording to Ma and McKeown (209), in transla-
tions the main verb of a sentence is the most im-
portant element for the sentence comprehension. In 
Machine Translation, the goal is to produce under-
standable translations. Therefore, we started our 
experiment by adjusting the verbal tense rules be-
twen the Brazilian Portuguese and English. 
 Natural languages do not share the same prop-
erties concerning verbs. The pair of languages Por-
tuguese and English for example, has diferent 
systems of modality. Acording to Palmer (1986), 
the English language has its system of modal verbs 
defined by can, could, wil, would, may, must, 
might, ought, shal, should, ned and dare. How-
ever, the Portuguese language has a system of 
mod consisting of indicative and subjunctive 
mods (Bechara, 202). 
Moreover, the Brazilian Portuguese and the 
English languages present morphological difer-
ences betwen verbal forms. For example, many 
verbs in English have the folowing form: Base + 
{-s form (3
rd
 person singular present)/PAST/-ing/-
ed} (Quirk and Grenbaum, 1973). Nonetheles, in 
Brazilian Portuguese the verbs present the folow-
ing form in most case: Base + thematic vowel + 
number/person agrement + tense/mod agree-
ment. This verbal form is present in every tense in 
the indicative and subjunctive mods. 
In order not to lose any information concerning 
the distinction betwen verbal tenses from Brazil-
ian Portuguese to English, we built a corpus with 
sentences in al verbal tenses in Portuguese (Be-
chara, 202) and manualy maped them into 
English. Each Portuguese verbal form was maped 
into English in al their conceivable translations. 
This corpus is a sentence-level paralel corpus with 
original sentences in the Portuguese language and 
their respective translations. The main goal of 
building this corpus was to verify al posible 
translations betwen Portuguese and English ver-
bal tenses. 
3.1 Methodology

Since this was a pilot experiment, we were inter-
ested in verifying if our changes improved the sys-
tem. This pilot experiment consists of translating a 
corpus containing al thre verb conjugation 
clases in Portuguese: 1) First conjugation clas: 
verbs ending in –AR; 2) Second conjugation clas: 
59
verbs which end in –ER; and 3) Third Conjugation 
clas: verbs ending in –IR, respecting each tense, 
mod and number in Stat-XFER system and then 
evaluating their results. 
To construct the thre corpora – one corpus for 
each conjugation clas – we extracted the 10 most 
frequent Portuguese verbs apearing in Gogle’s 
search engine
3
 in al thre conjugation clases in 
Portuguese. The search for the most frequent Por-
tuguese verbs was done using a tol developed in 
Python and folowed the folowing constrains: a) a 
result had to be an infinitive verb; b) had to be in 
the Portuguese language and c) had to be found in 
a Brazilian Web page. 
 From the one hundred most frequent Portu-
guese verbs in each conjugation clas we manualy 
built thre corpora of al thre verb conjugation 
clases in Portuguese, respecting each tense, mod, 
number, and person, and then a human translator 
maped them into English through manual transla-
tion. Each corpus contains no more than thre ex-
amples of each most frequent verb selected, 
resulting in 163 sentences. 
Once al verbal tenses were translated into Eng-
lish, we aplied these thre corpora to the Stat-
XFER system and evaluated al resulting transla-
tions using Meteor. Meteor is a metric for the eval-
uation of achine Translation output. The metric 
is based on the harmonic mean of unigram preci-
sion and recal (Lavie and Agarwal, 207). The 
Meteor scores are in a scale from 0 to 1, where 0 
means the translation is the farthest from the ref-
erence translation and 1 means the translation is 
most similar to a human translation. 
  After the evaluation, we initiated the improve-
ment of the gramar module with new syntactic 
transfer rules in order to deal with the problems 
presented by the diferences betwen the verbal 
tenses. The transfer rules were manualy developed 
and encoded how constituent structures in the 
source language transfer to the target language. In 
the begining of our research, the system had 13 
such rules in its gramar, but with some modifica-
tions the system now has 152 rules concerning the 
maping from Portuguese to English.  We ad a 
rule for each tense in each conjugation clas. Few 
rules adres more than one tense. A Stat-XFER 
syntactic rule example is shown below. 
                                                             
3
 htp:/ww.gogle.com.br 
1 {VP, 2} 
2 ;;SL: ANDO 
3 ;;TL: WALK 
4 VP::VP [V]  [V] 
5 ( 
6 (X1::Y1) 
7 ((X1 tense) = c pres) 
8 ((X1 mood) =c (*NOT* subj)) 
9 ((Y1 tense) = pres) 
10 ((X0 number) = (X1 number)) 
11 ((X0 person) = (X1 person)) 
12 ) 
The first line is the name of rule, in this case 
VP, 2. The second and third lines are examples of 
transference betwen both languages, which means 
a source language (SL) wil be encoded into a re-
spective target language (TL). The forth line indi-
cates that a simple verb in SL wil be translated as 
a simple verb in TL as wel. 
The condition of aplication of that rules is be-
twen parenthesis, shown in the fifth and twelfth 
lines.  In line six, inside these parentheses, it is 
indicated that the first element of the verbal phrase 
from source language, i.e. X1, wil be converted as 
the first element of the verbal phrase in the target 
language, i.e. Y1. Line seven says that X1 must be 
in the present tense and line eight says it must not 
be a subjunctive mod. Line nine states that Y1 
must be in the present tense. Lines ten and eleven 
indicate that X1 wil receive the number and per-
son from an element in the source language, X0 in 
this case. 
Another significant modification concerns the 
Bilingual phrasal lexicon. In the begining of our 
research, the system had 56.65 entries with their 
respective translations. However, many of these 
lexical items presented improper translations, repe-
titions and lack of corect meanings. To help im-
prove the development of our system some 
modifications in this lexicon were required.  This 
word level lexicon is in constant modification with 
the inclusion of mising lexicon items, cleaning of 
repeated items and corection of the inapropriate 
ones. The Stat-XFER word-level lexicon has now 
57.315 entries with their respective translations. 
3.2 Results

After the insertion of new syntactic rules, adjust-
ment of the existing (old) rules and the modifica-
60
tions in the lexicon, we translated the same thre 
corpora again to evaluate the performance one 
more time. The comparative results of these two 
evaluations are shown in Table 1 and Figure 2 be-
low. 
 
Corpora System in the 
initial state 
System in the 
curent state 
1
st
 conjugation clas 0.5346 0.5184 
2
nd
 conjugation clas 0.5182 0.5269 
3
rd
 conjugation clas 0.5291 0.5356 
Table 1. Meteor evaluation of initial and curent state of 
the system 
 
 
Figure 2.The graphic shows evaluation results of a sam-
ple of 489 sentences distributed acros al verbal tense, 
mod, number and person in English during the initial 
stage and the curent stage of the development of the 
Stat-XFER system. Results are in a scale of 0 to 1. 0 
means the translation is the farthest from the reference 
translation and 1 means the translation is most core-
lated to a human translation. Each entry in the picture 
coresponds to one sentence evaluated acording to the 
Meteor metric, distributed in the x-axis (initial evalua-
tion) and the y-axis (curent evaluation). The 45o line 
distinguishes those cases where performance of one 
evaluation was beter than the other. 
 
Interesting results were colected in this experi-
ment. The new results show improvements in cor-
relation with translation references on the second 
and third conjugations (Table 1). The system 
modifications we have done so far yielded some 
improvements. The inclusion and corection of 
syntactic rules acording to the diferences be-
twen linguistic parameters of the languages is the 
natural way to improve the results of Meteor eval-
uation in Stat-XFER system. 
 However, it is also noticeable that in the first con-
jugation we observed a decline in the performance 
of the system. This was one of the interesting ob-
servations we made based on this study. 
To beter study the efect of the inclusion of 
new gramar rules betwen verbal tenses, we per-
form a second evaluation of our system, now using 
a previously unsen corpus. This new corpus was 
build from FAPESP Magazine
4, which is a bilin-
gual online publication designed for the Brazilian 
scientific comunity. We extracted 415 sentences 
from the Humanities section and translated them 
with the old and new syntactic rules to evaluate the 
performance of the system. The comparative re-
sults of these two evaluations are shown in Table 2 
below. 
 
FAPESP Corpus System in the 
initial state 
System in the 
curent state 
Humanities section 0.284 0.565 
Table 2. Meteor evaluation of initial and actual state of 
the system 
 
The two evaluations of the FAPESP Magazine 
corpus indicate that the insertion of new gramar 
rules presents significant improvement compared 
to the system in its initial state. It is important to 
note that these results validate our experiment and 
confirm the improvement of the system. We dis-
cus our results in Section 4. 
4 Discussion

An interesting observation is that in the corpus 
manualy built for the experiment, the score of the 
first conjugation decreased (Table 1), while we 
expected that it should increase. We were surprised 
by this phenomenon and started investigating its 
causes. After preliminary studies, we now believe 
that this is due to a greater number of posible 
meanings that verbs from the first conjugation in 
Portuguese can asume, thus producing several 
translations in English, with smaler a corelation 
with respective human reference translations. 
Acording to Wiliams (1962), the endings of 
infinitive verbs in Portuguese are derived from 
Clasical Latin. The first conjugation in Brazilian 
Portuguese also contains verbs borowed from dif-
                                                             
4
 htp:/revistapesquisa.fapesp.br 
61
ferent languages, e.g. the English verb to delete 
has its corespondent deletar in Portuguese. 
Moreover, the creation of new verbs in Portuguese 
is always included in the first conjugation, sharing 
a comon set of characteristic of verbs ended in –
AR. While the second and third conjugation 
clases tend to have a finite number of verbs given 
from Clasical Latin, the first conjugation clas is 
stil increasing, unlike the second and third conju-
gations. These changes in verbs from the first 
conjugation clases may impact the development 
and evaluation of the system. 
Note that the corpora used to evaluate our sys-
tem are very smal compared to corpora recom-
mend for Machine Translation evaluations. Since 
this was a pilot experiment, we were only inter-
ested in verifying if the questions we wanted to ask 
were answerable. Further validation wil be per-
formed once more rules are aded to the system 
and new human translations are included in the 
reference corpus. 
Lavie et al. (204) aplied a transfer-rule learn-
ing aproach to this system in order to learn auto-
maticaly the transfer rules from Hebrew to 
English. We believe that this aproach can be ap-
plied to the Portuguese-to-English system and it 
can improve the coverage of gramar rules. 
5 Conclusion

The results of our experiment are very promising. 
We could observe a clear improvement in the per-
formance of the system after syntactic rules were 
aded to its gramar module. The new syntactic 
rules concerning the verbal tenses improved sys-
tem performance, but also indicated that there is 
significant rom for improvements in the Stat-
XFER system. In particular, improving the transfer 
rules in other aspects beyond the Verbal tense is a 
promising area of future research. 
Although this research is in a preliminary stage, 
we already made interesting linguistic observations 
about Portuguese verbs from first conjugation con-
cerning the development of Machine Translation 
systems. We believe this is a general isue that 
should concern every designer of Machine Trans-
lation system of the Brazilian Portuguese lan-
guage. We are very excited about the future stages 
of this study, and its potential contribution to the 
linguistic perspective of the field of Machine 
Translation. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Fidel Beraldi and Indaiá 
Basani from University of São Paulo, for develop-
ing the Python tol, which extracts the frequency 
of the verbs from Gogle search engine; Bianca 
Oliveira from Primacy Translations for translating 
the corpus reference; Jonathan Clark from Carne-
gie Melon University for helping the authors with 
clarifications about the system; Marcelo Modesto 
from University of São Paulo, for advisorship and 
Alon Lavie from Carnegie Melon University, for 
hospitality and technical clarifications. The author 
acknowledges that the initial Stat-XFER system 
was developed jointly by Modesto, Lavie and the 
entire AVENUE group 
(ww.cs.cmu.edu/~avenue). 
References  
Chiang, D., Knight, K. and W. Wang. 209. 1,01 
New Features for Statistical Machine Translation. 
Procedings of NACL-HLT.  
Comrie, B. 193. Tense. Cambridge University Pres. 
Ma, W., McKeown, K. 209. Where’s the Verb? Cor-
recting achine Translation During Answering. 
Procedings of the ACL-IJCNLP.  
Bechara, E. 202. Moderna gramática do Português. 
Lucerna. 
Lavie, A., Vogel, S., Levin, L., Peterson, E., Probst, K., 
Font Llitjos, A., Reynolds, R., Carbonel, J., and 
Cohen, R. 203. Experiments with a Hindi-to-
English Transfer-based MT System under a Miserly 
Data Scenario. ACM Transactions on Asian Lan-
guage Information Procesing (TALIP), 2(2). 
Lavie, A., Wintner, S., Eytani, Y., Peterson, E. and 
Probst, K. 204. Rapid Prototyping of a Transfer-
based Hebrew-to-English Machine Translation Sys-
tem. Procedings of the 10
th
 International Confer-
ence on Theoretical Methodological Isues in 
Machine Translation (TI-2004).  
Lavie, A., Agarwal, A. 207. METEOR: An Automatic 
Metric for MT Evaluation with High Levels of Cor-
relation with Human Judgments. Procedings of the 
2
nd
 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation at 
the 45
th
 Meting of the ACL (ACL-207), p. 28—
231. 
Lavie, A. 208. Stat-XFER: A General Search-based 
Syntax-driven Framework for Machine Translation. 
Invited paper in Procedings of CICLing-208. 
62
Haifa, Israel, February 208. Gelbuch (ed.), Compu-
tational Linguistics and Inteligent Text Procesing, 
LNCS 4919, Springer. p. 362-375. 
Palmer, F. 1986. Mod and Modality. Cambridge Uni-
versity Pres. 
Probst, K., Levin, L., Peterson, E., Lavie, A., and Car-
bonel, J. 202. MT for Minority Languages Using 
Elicitation-Based Learning of Syntactic Transfer 
Rules. Machine Translation, 17 (4). 
Quirk, R., Grenbaum, S. 1973. A University Gramar 
of English. Longman. 
Wiliams, E. 1962. From Latin to Portuguese: Histori-
cal Phonology and Morphology of the Portuguese 
Language. University of Pensylvania Pres. 
63

