Subsentential Translation Memory for Computer Assisted Writing and Translation Jian-Cheng Wu Department of Computer Science National Tsing Hua University 101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 300, Taiwan, ROC D928322@oz.nthu.edu.tw Thomas C.
Chuang Department of Computer Science Van Nung Institute of Technology No.
1 Van-Nung Road Chung-Li Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, ROC tomchuang@cc.vit.edu.tw Wen-Chi Shei, Jason S.
Chang Department of Computer Science National Tsing Hua University 101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, 300, Taiwan, ROC jschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw Abstract This paper describes a database of translation memory, TotalRecall, developed to encourage authentic and idiomatic use in second language writing.
TotalRecall is a bilingual concordancer that support search query in English or Chinese for relevant sentences and translations.
Although initially intended for learners of English as Foreign Language (EFL) in Taiwan, it is a gold mine of texts in English or Mandarin Chinese.
TotalRecall is particularly useful for those who write in or translate into a foreign language.
We exploited and structured existing high-quality translations from bilingual corpora from a Taiwan-based Sinorama Magazine and Official Records of Hong Kong Legislative Council to build a bilingual concordance.
Novel approaches were taken to provide highprecision bilingual alignment on the subsentential and lexical levels.
A browserbased user interface was developed for ease of access over the Internet.
Users can search for word, phrase or expression in English or Mandarin.
The Web-based user interface facilitates the recording of the user actions to provide data for further research.
1 Introduction
Translation memory has been found to be more effective alternative to machine translation for translators, especially when working with batches of similar texts.
That is particularly true with socalled delta translation of the next versions for publications that need continuous revision such as an encyclopaedia or user’s manual.
On another area of language study, researchers on English Language Teaching (ELT) have increasingly looked to concordancer of very large corpora as a new re-source for translation and language learning.
Concordancers have been indispensable for lexicographers.
But now language teachers and students also embrace the concordancer to foster data-driven, student-centered learning.
A bilingual concordance, in a way, meets the needs of both communities, the computer assisted translation (CAT) and computer assisted language learning (CALL).
A bilingual concordancer is like a monolingual concordance, except that each sentence is followed by its translation counterpart in a second language.
“Existing translations contain more solutions to more translation problems than any other existing resource.” (Isabelle 1993).
The same can be argued for language learning; existing texts offer more answers for the learner than any teacher or reference work do.
However, it is important to provide easy access for translators and learning writers alike to find the relevant and informative citations quickly.
For instance, the English-French concordance system, TransSearch provides a familiar interface for the users (Macklovitch et al.2000). The user type in the expression in question, a list of citations will come up and it is easy to scroll down until one finds translation that is useful much like using a search engine.
TransSearch exploits sentence alignment techniques (Brown et al 1990; Gale and Church 1990) to facilitate bilingual search at the granularity level of sentences.
In this paper, we describe a bilingual concordancer which facilitate search and visualization with fine granularity.
TotalRecall exploits subsentential and word alignment to provide a new kind of bilingual concordancer.
Through the interactive interface and clustering of short subsentential bi-lingual citations, it helps translators and non-native speakers find ways to translate or express them-selves in a foreign language.
2 Aligning
the corpus Central to TotalRecall is a bilingual corpus and a set of programs that provide the bilingual analyses to yield a translation memory database out of the bilingual corpus.
Currently, we are working with

