TANGO: Bilingual Collocational Concordancer Jia-Yan Jian Department of Computer Science National Tsing Hua University 101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan g914339@oz.nthu.edu.tw Yu-Chia Chang Inst.
of Information System and Applictaion National Tsing Hua University 101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan u881222@alumni.nthu.e du.tw Jason S.
Chang Department of Computer Science National Tsing Hua University 101, Kuangfu Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan jschang@cs.nthu.edu.tw Abstract In this paper, we describe TANGO as a collocational concordancer for looking up collocations.
The system was designed to answer user’s query of bilingual collocational usage for nouns, verbs and adjectives.
We first obtained collocations from the large monolingual British National Corpus (BNC).
Subsequently, we identified collocation instances and translation counterparts in the bilingual corpus such as Sinorama Parallel Corpus (SPC) by exploiting the wordalignment technique.
The main goal of the concordancer is to provide the user with a reference tools for correct collocation use so as to assist second language learners to acquire the most eminent characteristic of native-like writing.
1 Introduction
Collocations are a phenomenon of word combination occurring together relatively often.
Collocations also reflect the speaker’s fluency of a language, and serve as a hallmark of near nativelike language capability.
Collocation extraction is critical to a range of studies and applications, including natural language generation, computer assisted language learning, machine translation, lexicography, word sense disambiguation, cross language information retrieval, and so on.
Hanks and Church (1990) proposed using pointwise mutual information to identify collocations in lexicography; however, the method may result in unacceptable collocations for low-count pairs.
The best methods for extracting collocations usually take into consideration both linguistic and statistical constraints.
Smadja (1993) also detailed techniques for collocation extraction and developed a program called XTRACT, which is capable of computing flexible collocations based on elaborated statistical calculation.
Moreover, log likelihood ratios are regarded as a more effective method to identify collocations especially when the occurrence count is very low (Dunning, 1993).
Smadja’s XTRACT is the pioneering work on extracting collocation types.
XTRACT employed three different statistical measures related to how associated a pair to be collocation type.
It is complicated to set different thresholds for each statistical measure.
We decided to research and develop a new and simple method to extract monolingual collocations.
We also provide a web-based user interface capable of searching those collocations and its usage.
The concordancer supports language learners to acquire the usage of collocation.
In the following section, we give a brief overview of the TANGO concordancer.
2 TANGO
TANGO is a concordancer capable of answering users’ queries on collocation use.
Currently, TANGO supports two text collections: a monolingual corpus (BNC) and a bilingual corpus (SPC).
The system consists of four main parts: 2.1 Chunk and Clause Information Integrated For CoNLL-2000 shared task, chunking is considered as a process that divides a sentence into syntactically correlated parts of words.
With the benefits of CoNLL training data, we built a chunker that turn sentences into smaller syntactic structure of non-recursive basic phrases to facilitate precise collocation extraction.
It becomes easier to identify the argument-predicate relationship by looking at adjacent chunks.
By doing so, we save time as opposed to n-gram statistics or full parsing.
Take a text in CoNLL2000 for example: The words correlated with the same chunk tag can be further grouped together (see Table 1).
For instance, with chunk information, we can extract

