Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion Volume), pages 93–96,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Using Structural Information for Identifying Similar Chinese Characters 
 
 
Chao-Lin Liu Jen-Hsiang Lin 
Department of Computer Science, National Chengchi University, Taipei 11605, Taiwan 
{chaolin, g9429}@cs.nccu.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract 
Chinese characters that are similar in their 
pronunciations or in their internal structures 
are useful for computer-assisted language 
learning and for psycholinguistic studies. Al-
though it is possible for us to employ image-
based methods to identify visually similar 
characters, the resulting computational costs 
can be very high. We propose methods for 
identifying visually similar Chinese characters 
by adopting and extending the basic concepts 
of a proven Chinese input method--Cangjie. 
We present the methods, illustrate how they 
work, and discuss their weakness in this paper. 
1 Introduction

A Chinese sentence consists of a sequence of char-
acters that are not separated by spaces. The func-
tion of a Chinese character is not exactly the same 
as the function of an English word. Normally, two 
or more Chinese characters form a Chinese word to 
carry a meaning, although there are Chinese words 
that contain only one Chinese character. For in-
stance, a translation for “conference” is “研討會 ” 
and a translation for “go” is “去 ”. Here “研討會 ” 
is a word formed by three characters, and “去 ” is a 
word with only one character. 
Just like that there are English words that are 
spelled similarly, there are Chinese characters that 
are pronounced or written alike. For instance, in 
English, the sentence “John plays an important roll 
in this event.” contains an incorrect word. We 
should replace “roll” with “role”. In Chinese, the 
sentence “今天上午我們來 試場 買菜 ” contains an 
incorrect word. We should replace “試場 ” (a place 
for taking examinations) with “市場 ” (a market). 
These two words have the same pronunciation, 
shi(4) chang(3)
 †, and both represent locations. The 
sentence “經理要我 構買 一部計算機 ” also con-
                                                           
†
 We use Arabic digits to denote the four tones in Mandarin. 
tains an error, and we need to replace “構買 ” with 
“購買 ”. “構買 ” is considered an incorrect word, 
but can be confused with “購買 ” because the first 
characters in these words look similar. 
Characters that are similar in their appear-
ances or in their pronunciations are useful for 
computer-assisted language learning (cf. Burstein 
& Leacock, 2005). When preparing test items for 
testing students’ knowledge about correct words in 
a computer-assisted environment, a teacher pro-
vides a sentence which contains the character that 
will be replaced by an incorrect character. The 
teacher needs to specify the answer character, and 
the software will provide two types of incorrect 
characters which the teachers will use as distracters 
in the test items. The first type includes characters 
that look similar to the answer character, and the 
second includes characters that have the same or 
similar pronunciations with the answer character. 
Similar characters are also useful for studies 
in Psycholinguistics. Yeh and Li (2002) studied 
how similar characters influenced the judgments 
made by skilled readers of Chinese. Taft, Zhu, and 
Peng (1999) investigated the effects of positions of 
radicals on subjects’ lexical decisions and naming 
responses. Computer programs that can automati-
cally provide similar characters are thus potentially 
helpful for designing related experiments. 
2 Identifying
Similar Characters with In-
formation about the Internal Structures 
We present some similar Chinese characters in the 
first subsection, illustrate how we encode Chinese 
characters in the second subsection, elaborate how 
we improve the current encoding method to facili-
tate the identification of similar characters in the 
third subsection, and discuss the weakness of our 
current approach in the last subsection. 
2.1 Examples
of Similar Chinese Characters 
We show three categories of confusing Chinese 
characters in Figures 1, 2, and 3. Groups of similar 
93
characters are separated by spaces in these figures. 
In Figure 1, characters in each group differ at the 
stroke level. Similar characters in every group in 
the first row in Figure 2 share a common part, but 
the shared part is not the radical of these characters. 
Similar characters in every group in the second 
row in Figure 2 share a common part, which is the 
radical of these characters. Similar characters in 
every group in Figure 2 have different pronuncia-
tions. We show six groups of homophones that 
also share a component in Figure 3. Characters that 
are similar in both pronunciations and internal 
structures are most confusing to new learners. 
It is not difficult to list all of those characters 
that have the same or similar pronunciations, e.g., 
“試場 ” and “市場 ”, if we have a machine readable 
lexicon that provides information about pronuncia-
tions of characters and when we ignore special pat-
terns for tone sandhi in Chinese (Chen, 2000).  
In contrast, it is relatively difficult to find 
characters that are written in similar ways, e.g., 
“構 ” with “購 ”, in an efficient way. It is intriguing 
to resort to image processing methods to find such 
structurally similar words, but the computational 
costs can be very high, considering that there can 
be tens of thousands of Chinese characters. There 
are more than 22000 different characters in large 
corpus of Chinese documents (Juang et al., 2005), 
so directly computing the similarity between im-
ages of these characters demands a lot of computa-
tion. There can be more than 4.9 billion 
combinations of character pairs. The Ministry of 
Education in Taiwan suggests that about 5000 
characters are needed for ordinary usage. In this 
case, there are about 25 million pairs. 
The quantity of combinations is just one of 
the bottlenecks. We may have to shift the positions 
of the characters “appropriately” to find the com-
mon part of a character pair. The appropriateness 
for shifting characters is not easy to define, making 
the image-based method less directly useful; for 
instance, the common part of the characters in the 
right group in the second row in Figure 3 appears 
in different places in the characters. 
Lexicographers employ radicals of Chinese 
characters to organize Chinese characters into sec-
tions in dictionaries. Hence, the information should 
be useful. The groups in the second row in Figure 
2 show some examples. The shared components in 
these groups are radicals of the characters, so we 
can find the characters of the same group in the 
same section in a Chinese dictionary. However, 
information about radicals as they are defined by 
the lexicographers is not sufficient. The groups of 
characters shown in the first row in Figure 2 have 
shared components. Nevertheless, the shared com-
ponents are not considered as radicals, so the char-
acters, e.g., “頸 ”and “勁 ”, are listed in different 
sections in the dictionary.   
2.2 Encoding
the Chinese Characters 
The Cangjie
‡
 method is one of the most popular 
methods for people to enter Chinese into com-
puters. The designer of the Cangjie method, Mr. 
Bong-Foo Chu, selected a set of 24 basic elements 
in Chinese characters, and proposed a set of rules 
to decompose Chinese characters into elements 
that belong to this set of building blocks (Chu, 
2008). Hence, it is possible to define the similarity 
between two Chinese characters based on the simi-
larity between their Cangjie codes.  
Table 1, not counting the first row, has three 
                                                           
‡
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cangjie_method 
士土工干千 戌戍成 田由甲申
母毋 勿匆 人入 未末 采釆 凹凸
 
Figure 1. Some similar Chinese characters 
頸勁 搆溝 陪倍 硯現 裸棵 搞篙
列刑 盆盎盂盅 因困囚 間閒閃開
 
Figure 2. Some similar Chinese characters that have 
different pronunciations 
形刑型 踵種腫 購構搆 紀記計
園圓員 脛逕徑痙勁
 
Figure 3. Homophones with a shared component
 Cangjie Codes  Cangjie Codes
士 十一 土 土 
工 一中一 干 一十 
勿 心竹竹 匆  竹田心 
未 十木 末 木十 
頸 一一一月金 勁 一一大尸 
硯 一口月山山 現 一土月山山 
搞 手卜口月 篙 竹卜口月 
列 一弓中弓 刑 一廿中弓 
因 田大 困 田木 
間 日弓日 閒 日弓月 
踵 口一竹十土 種 竹木竹十土 
腫 月竹十土 紀 女火尸山 
購 月金廿廿月 構 木廿廿月 
記 卜口尸山 計 卜口十 
圓 田口月金 員 口月山金 
脛 月一女一 逕 卜一女一 
徑 竹人一女一 痙 大一女一 
Table 1. Cangjie codes for some characters
94
sections, each showing the Cangjie codes for some 
characters in Figures 1, 2, and 3. Every Chinese 
character is decomposed into an ordered sequence 
of elements. (We will find that a subsequence of 
these elements comes from a major component of a 
character, shortly.) Evidently, computing the num-
ber of shared elements provides a viable way to 
determine “visually similar” characters for charac-
ters that appeared in Figure 2 and Figure 3. For 
instance, we can tell that “搞 ” and “篙 ” are similar 
because their Cangjie codes share “卜口月 ”, which 
in fact represent “高 ”.  
Unfortunately, the Cangjie codes do not ap-
pear to be as helpful for identifying the similarities 
between characters that differ subtly at the stroke 
level, e.g., “士土工干 ” and other characters listed 
in Figure 1. There are special rules for decompos-
ing these relatively basic characters in the Cangjie 
method, and these special encodings make the re-
sulting codes less useful for our tasks. 
The Cangjie codes for characters that contain 
multiple components were intentionally simplified 
to allow users to input Chinese characters more 
efficiently. The longest Cangjie code for any Chi-
nese character contains no more than five elements. 
In the Cangjie codes for “脛 ” and “徑 ”, we see “一
女一 ” for the component “巠 ”, but this component 
is represented only by “一一 ” in the Cangjie codes 
for “頸 ” and “勁 ”. The simplification makes it 
relatively harder to identify visually similar charac-
ters by comparing the actual Cangjie codes.  
2.3 Engineering
the Original Cangjie Codes 
Although useful for the sake of designing input 
method, the simplification of Cangjie codes causes 
difficulties when we use the codes to find similar 
characters. Hence, we choose to use the complete 
codes for the components in our database. For in-
stance, in our database, the codes for “巠 ”, “脛 ”, 
“徑 ”, “頸 ”, and “勁 ” are, respectively, “一女女一 ”, 
“月一女女一 ”, “竹人一女女一 ”, “一女女一一月
山金 ”, and “一女女一大尸 ”.  
The knowledge about the graphical structures 
of the Chinese characters (cf. Juang et al., 2005; 
Lee, 2008) can be instrumental as well. Consider 
the examples in Figure 2. Some characters can be 
decomposed vertically; e.g., “盅 ” can be split into 
two smaller components, i.e., “中 ” and “皿 ”. Some 
characters can be decomposed horizontally; e.g., 
“現 ” is consisted of “王 ” and “見 ”. Some have 
enclosing components; e.g., “人 ” is enclosed in 
“囗 ” in “囚 ”. Hence, we can consider the locations 
of the components as well as the number of shared 
components in determining the similarity between 
characters. 
Figure 4 illustrates possible layouts of the 
components in Chinese characters that were 
adopted by the Cangjie method (cf. Lee, 2008). A 
sample character is placed below each of these 
layouts. A box in a layout indicates a component in 
a character, and there can be at most three compo-
nents in a character.  We use digits to indicate the 
ordering the components. Notice that, in the sec-
ond row, there are two boxes in the second to the 
rightmost layout. A larger box contains a smaller 
one. There are three boxes in the rightmost layout, 
and two smaller boxes are inside the outer box. 
Due to space limits, we do not show “1” for this 
outer box. 
After recovering the simplified Cangjie code 
for a character, we can associate the character with 
a tag that indicates the overall layout of its compo-
nents, and separate the code sequence of the char-
acter according to the layout of its components. 
Hence, the information about a character includes 
the tag for its layout and between one to three se-
quences of code elements. Table 2 shows the anno-
承郁 謝昭
君森葦 國因
1 1 2 12
3
1
23
3
2
1
1
2
3
2
2
1
1
2
3
Figure 4. Arrangements of components in Chinese 
 Layout Part 1 Part 2 Part 3
承 1 弓弓手人   
郁 2 大月 弓中  
昭 3 日 尸竹 口 
謝 4 卜 一一 口  竹 難 竹  木 戈  
君 5 尸大 口  
森 6 木 木 木 
葦 7 廿 木一 手 
因 8 田 大  
國 9 田 戈 口一 
頸 2 一 女女 一 一月 山 金   
徑 2 竹人 一女 女 一  
員 5 口 月山金  
圓 9 田 口 月 山 金
相 2 木 月山  
想 5 木 月 山 心  
箱 6 竹 木 月山 
Table 2. Annotated and expanded code
95
tated and expanded codes of the sample characters 
in Figure 4 and the codes for some characters that 
we will discuss. The layouts are numbered from 
left to right and from top to bottom in Figure 4. 
Elements that do not belong to the original Canjie 
codes of the characters are shown in smaller font.  
Recovering the elements that were dropped 
out by the Cangjie method and organizing the sub-
sequences of elements into parts facilitate the iden-
tification of similar characters. It is now easier to 
find that the character (頸 ) that is represented by 
“一女女一 ” and “一月山金 ” looks similar to the 
character (徑 ) that is represented by “竹人 ” and 
“一女女一 ” in our database than using their origi-
nal Cangjie codes in Table 1. Checking the codes 
for “員 ” and “圓 ” in Table 1 and Table 2 will offer 
an additional support for our design decisions. 
In the worst case, we have to compare nine 
pairs of code sequences for two characters that 
both have three components. Since we do not sim-
plify codes for components and all components 
have no more than five elements, conducting the 
comparisons operations are simple. 
2.4 Drawbacks
of Using the Cangjie Codes 
Using the Cangjie codes as the basis for comparing 
the similarity between characters introduces some 
potential problems.  
It appears that the Cangjie codes for some 
characters, particular those simple ones, were not 
assigned without ambiguous principles. Relying on 
Cangjie codes to compute the similarity between 
such characters can be difficult. For instance, “分 ” 
uses the fifth layout, but “兌 ” uses the first layout 
in Figure 4. The first section in Table 1 shows the 
Cangjie codes for some character pairs that are dif-
ficult to compare.  
Due to the design of the Cangjie codes, there 
can be at most one component at the left hand side 
and at most one component at the top in the layouts. 
The last three entries in Table 2 provide an exam-
ple for these constraints. As a standalone character, 
“相 ” uses the second layout. Like the standalone 
“相 ”, the “相 ” in “箱 ” was divided into two parts. 
However, in “想 ”,  “相 ” is treated as an individual 
component because it is on top of “想 ”. Similar 
problems may occur elsewhere, e.g., “森焚 ” and 
“恩因 ”. There are also some exceptional cases; e.g., 
“品 ” uses the sixth layout, but “闆 ” uses the fifth 
layout. 
3 Concluding
Remarks 
We adopt the Cangjie alphabet to encode Chinese 
characters, but choose not to simplify the code se-
quences, and annotate the characters with the lay-
out information of their components. The resulting 
method is not perfect, but allows us to find visually 
similar characters more efficient than employing 
the image-based methods.  
Trying to find conceptually similar but con-
textually inappropriate characters should be a natu-
ral step after being able to find characters that have 
similar pronunciations and that are visually similar. 
Acknowledgments 
Work reported in this paper was supported in part 
by the plan NSC-95-2221-E-004-013-MY2 from 
the National Science Council and in part by the 
plan ATU-NCCU-96H061 from the Ministry of 
Education of Taiwan. 

References  

Jill Burstein and Claudia Leacock. editors. 2005. Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Building Educational Applications Using NLP, ACL. 

Matthew Y. Chen. 2000. Tone Sandhi: Patterns across 
Chinese Dialects. (Cambridge. Studies in Linguistics 
92.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Bong-Foo Chu. 2008. Handbook of the Fifth Generation 
of the Cangjie Input Method, web version, available 
at http://www.cbflabs.com/book/ocj5/ocj5/index.html. 
Last visited on 14 Mar. 2008. 

Hsiang Lee. 2008. Cangjie Input Methods in 30 Days, 
http://input.foruto.com/cjdict/Search_1.php, Foruto 
Company, Hong Kong. Last visited on 14 Mar. 2008. 

Derming Juang, Jenq-Haur Wang, Chen-Yu Lai, Ching-
Chun Hsieh, Lee-Feng Chien, and Jan-Ming Ho. 
2005. Resolving the unencoded character problem for 
Chinese digital libraries. Proceedings of the Fifth 
ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, 
311–319. 

Marcus Taft, Xiaoping Zhu, and Danling Peng. 1999. 
Positional specificity of radicals in Chinese character 
recognition, Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 
498–519. 

Su-Ling Yeh and Jing-Ling Li. 2002. Role of structure 
and component in judgments of visual similarity of 
Chinese characters, Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 28(4), 933–947.  

