Proceedings of the ACL-08: HLT Student Research Workshop (Companion Volume), pages 37–42,
Columbus, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Arabic Language Modeling with Finite State Transducers
Ilana Heintz
Department of Linguistics
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
heintz.38@osu.edu∗
Abstract
In morphologically rich languages such as
Arabic, the abundance of word forms result-
ingfromincreasedmorphemecombinationsis
significantly greater than for languages with
fewer inflected forms (Kirchhoff et al., 2006).
Thisexacerbatestheout-of-vocabulary(OOV)
problem. Test set words are more likely to
be unknown, limiting the effectiveness of the
model. The goal of this study is to use the
regularities of Arabic inflectional morphology
to reduce the OOV problem in that language.
We hope that success in this task will result in
a decrease in word error rate in Arabic auto-
matic speech recognition.
1 Introduction
The task of language modeling is to predict the next
word in a sequence of words (Jelinek et al., 1991).
Predicting words that have not yet been seen is the
main obstacle (Gale and Sampson, 1995), and is
called the Out of Vocabulary (OOV) problem. In
morphologically rich languages, the OOV problem
is worsened by the increased number of morpheme
combinations.
Berton et al. (1996) and Geutner (1995) ap-
proached this problem in German, finding that lan-
guagemodelsbuiltondecomposedwordsreducethe
OOV rate of a test set. In Carki et al. (2000), Turk-
ishwordsaresplitintosyllablesforlanguagemodel-
ing, also reducing the OOV rate (but not improving
∗This work was supported by a student-faculty fellowship
from the AFRL/Dayton Area Graduate Studies Insititute, and
worked on in partnership with Ray Slyh and Tim Anderson of
the Air Force Research Labs.
WER).Morphologicaldecompositionis alsousedto
boost language modeling scores in Korean (Kwon,
2000) and Finnish (Hirsim¨aki et al., 2006).
We approach the processing of Arabic morphol-
ogy, both inflectional and derivational, with finite
statemachines(FSMs). Weuseatechniquethatpro-
duces many morphological analyses for each word,
retaining information about possible stems, affixes,
root letters, and templates. We build our language
models on the morphemes generated by the anal-
yses. The FSMs generate spurious analyses. That
is, although a word out of context may have several
morphological analyses, in context only one such
analysis is correct. We retain all analyses. We ex-
pectthatanyincorrectmorphemesthataregenerated
will not affect the predictions of the model, because
they will be rare, and the language model introduces
bias towards frequent morphemes. Although many
words in a test set may not have occurred in a train-
ingset,themorphemesthatmakeupthatwordlikely
will have occurred. Using many decompositions to
describe each word sets apart this study from other
similarstudies,includingthosebyWangandVergyri
(2006) and Xiang et al. (2006).
This study differs from previous research on Ara-
bic language modeling and Arabic automatic speech
recognition in two other ways. To promote cross-
dialectal use of the techniques, we use properties of
Arabicmorphologythatweassumetobecommonto
many dialects. Also, we treat morphological analy-
sis and vowel prediction with a single solution.
An overview of Arabic morphology is given in
Section 2. A description of the finite state machine
process used to decompose the Arabic words into
37
morphemes follows in Section 3. The experimental
language model training procedure and the proce-
dures for training two baseline language models are
discussed in Section 4. We evaluate all three models
using average negative log probability and coverage
statistics, discussed in Section 5.
2 Arabic
Morphology
This section describes the morphological processes
responsible for the proliferation of word forms in
Arabic. Thediscussionisbasedoninformationfrom
grammar textbooks such as that by Haywood and
Nahmad (1965), as well as descriptions in various
Arabic NLP articles, including that by Kirchhoff et
al. (2006).
Word formation in Arabic takes place on two
levels. Arabic is a root-and-pattern language in
which many vocalic and consonantal patterns com-
bine with semantic roots to create surface forms. A
root, usually composed of three letters, may encode
more than one meaning. Only by combining a root
with a pattern does one create a meaningfuland spe-
cific term. The combination of a root with a pattern
isastem. Insomecases,astemisacompletesurface
form; in other cases, affixes are added.
The second level of word formation is inflec-
tional, and is usually a concatenative process. In-
flectional affixes are used to encode person, number,
gender, tense, and mood information on verbs, and
gender, number, and case informationon nouns. Af-
fixes are a closed class of morphemes, and they en-
code predictable information. In addition to inflec-
tion, cliticization is common in Arabic text. Prepo-
sitions, conjunctions, and possessive pronouns are
expressed as clitics.
This combination of templatic derivational mor-
phology and concatenative inflectional morphology,
together with cliticization, results in a rich variation
in word forms. This richness is in contrast with the
slower growth in number of English word forms. As
shown in Table 1, the Arabic stem /drs/, meaning to
study, combines with the present tense verb pattern
“CCuCu”, where the ‘C’ represents a root letter, to
form the present tense stem drusu. This stem can be
combined with 11 different combinations of inflec-
tional affixes, creating as many unique word forms.
Table 1 can be expanded with stems from the
Transliteration Translation Affixes
adrusu I study a-
nadrusu we study na-
tadrusu you (ms) study ta-
tadrusina you (fs) study ta,-ina
tadrusAn you (dual) study ta-, -An
tadrusun you (mp) study ya-, -n
tadrusna you (fp) study ta-, -na
yadrusu he studies ya-
tadrusu she studies ta-
yadrusan they (dual) study ya-, -An
yadrusun they (mp) study ya-, -n
yadrusna they (fp) study ya-, -na
Table 1: An Example of Arabic Inflectional Morphology
same root representing different tenses. For in-
stance, the stem daras means studied. Or, we can
combine the root with a different pattern to obtain
different meanings, for instance, to teach or to learn.
Each of these stems can combine with the same or
different affixes to create additional word forms.
Adding a single clitic to the words in Table 1 will
double the number of forms. For instance, the word
adrusu, meaning I study, can take the enclitic ‘ha’,
to express I study it. Some clitics can be combined,
increasingagain the numberof possibleword forms.
Stems differ in some ways that do not surface in
the Arabic orthography. For instance, the pattern
“CCiCu” differs from “CCuCu” only in one short
vowel, which is encoded orthographically as a fre-
quently omitted diacritic. Thus, adrisu and adrusu
are homographs, but not homophones. This prop-
erty helps decrease the number of word forms, but
it causes ambiguity in morphological analyses. Re-
covering the quality of short vowels is a significant
challenge in Arabic natural language processing.
This abundance of unique word forms in Modern
Standard Arabic is problematic for natural language
processing (NLP). NLP tasks usually require that
some analysis be provided for each word (or other
linguistic unit) in a given data set. For instance,
in spoken word recognition, the decoding process
makes use of a language model to predict the words
thatbestfittheacousticsignal. Onlywordsthathave
been seen in the language model’s training data will
be proposed. Because of the immense number of
possible word forms in Arabic, it is highly proba-
38
01m
2m t d A s r3A s r m t d
4m t d A s r
01m t d A s r
2s r m t d A3A
4m t d A s r
Figure1: Twotemplates,mCCC andCCAC asfinitestate
recognizers, with a small sample alphabet of letters A, d,
m, r, s, and t.
0m:mt:td:dA:As:sr:r
1m:[m
2A:A s:s r:r m:m t:t d:d
3m:m t:t d:d A:A s:s r:r
4m:m] t:t] d:d] A:A] s:s] r:r]m:mt:td:dA:As:sr:r
Figure2: Thefirsttemplateabove, nowatransducer, with
affixesaccepted,andthestemseparatedbybracketsinthe
output.
ble that the words in an acoustic signal will not have
been present in the language model’s training text,
and incorrect words will be predicted. We use in-
formation about the morphology of Arabic to create
a more flexible language model. This model should
encounterfewer unseenforms, as the units we use to
model the language are the more frequent and pre-
dictable morphemes, as opposed to full word forms.
As a result, the word error rate is expected to de-
crease.
3 FSM
Analyses
Thissectiondescribeshowwederive,foreachword,
a lattice that describes all possible morphological
decompositions for that word. We start with a group
oftemplatesthatdefinetherootconsonantpositions,
long vowels, and consonants for all Arabic regular
and augmented stems. For instance, where C repre-
sents a root consonant, three possible templates are
0
2m 1
[mdrA]
3[drAs] s
Figure 3: Two analyses of the word “mdrAs”, as pro-
duced by composing a word FSM with the template
FSMs above.
CCC,mCCC,andCACC.Webuildafinitestaterec-
ognizer for each of the templates, and in each case,
the C arcs are expanded, so that every possible root
consonant in the vocabulary has an arc at that posi-
tion. ThetwoexamplesinFigure1showthepatterns
mCCC and CCAC and a short sample alphabet.
At the start and end node of each template recog-
nizer, we add arcs with self-loops. This allows any
sequence of consonants as an affix. To track stem
boundaries, we add an open bracket to the first stem
arc, and a close bracket to the final stem arc. The
templates are compiled into finite state transducers.
Figure 2 shows the result of these additions.
For each word in the vocabulary, we define a sim-
ple, one-arc-per-letter finite state recognizer. We
composethiswitheachofthetemplates. Somenum-
ber of analyses result from each composition. That
is,asingletemplatemaynotcomposewiththeword,
may compose with it in a unique way, or may com-
pose with the word in several ways. Each of the suc-
cessful compositions produces a finite state recog-
nizer with brackets surrounding the stem. We use a
script to collapse the arcs within the stem to a single
arc. The resultis shown in Figure 3, wherethe word
“mdrAs” has two analyses corresponding to the two
templates shown. We store a lattice as in Figure 3
for each word.
The patterns that we use to constrain the stem
forms are drawn from Haywood and Nahmad
(1965). These patterns also specify the short vowel
patterns that are used with words derived from each
pattern. An option is to simply add these short
vowels to the output symbols in the template FSTs.
However, because several short vowel options may
exist for each template, this would greatly increase
thesizeoftheresultinglattices. Wepostponethisef-
fort. In this work, we focus solely on the usefulness
of the unvoweled morphological decompositions.
We do not assess or need to assess the accuracy of
39
the morphological decompositions. Our hypothesis
is that by having many possible decompositions per
word, the frequencies of various affixes and stems
across all words will lead the model to the strongest
predictions. Even if the final predictions are not pre-
scriptively correct, they may be the most useful de-
compositions for the purpose of speech decoding.
4 Procedure
We comparea languagemodelbuilton multipleseg-
mentations as determined by the FSMs described
above to two baseline models. We call our exper-
imental model FSM-LM; the baseline models use
word-basedn-grams(WORD), and pre-definedaffix
segmentations (AFFIX). Our data set in this study
is the TDT4 Arabic broadcast news transcriptions
(Kong and Graff, 2005). Because of time and mem-
ory constraints,we built and evaluated all models on
only a subsection of the training data, 100 files of
TDT4, balanced across the years of collection, and
containingfilesfromeachof the 4 news sources. We
use 90 files for training, comprising about 6.3 mil-
lion unvoweled word tokens, and 10 files for testing,
comprisingabout700Kword tokens, and around5K
sentences. The size of the vocabulary is 104757. We
use ten-fold cross-validation in our evaluations.
4.1 ExperimentalModel
We extract the vocabulary of the training data, and
compile the word lattices as described in Section 3.
The union of all decompositions (a lattice) for each
individual word is stored separately.
For each sentence of training data, we concate-
nate the lattices representing each word in that sen-
tence. We use SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) to calculate
the posterior expected n-gram count for morpheme
sequencesupto4-gramsinthesentence-longlattice.
The estimated frequency of an n-gram N is calcu-
lated as the number of occurrences of that n-gram
in the lattice, divided by the number of paths in the
lattice. This is true so long as the paths are equally
weighted; at this point in our study, this is the case.
We merge the n-gram counts over all sentences
in all of the training files. Next, we estimate a lan-
guagemodelbasedon the n-gramcounts, usingonly
the 64000 most frequent morphemes, since we ex-
pect this vocabulary size may be a limitation of our
ASR system. Also, by limiting the vocabulary size
of all of our models (including the baseline models
described below), we can make a fairer comparison
among the models. We use Good-Turing smoothing
to account for unseen morphemes, all of which are
replaced with a single “unknown” symbol.
In later work, we will apply our LM statistics to
the lattices, and recalculate the path weights and
estimated counts. In this study, the paths remain
equally weighted.
We evaluate this model, which we call FSM-LM,
with respect to two baseline models.
4.2 Baseline
Models
For the WORD model, we do no manipulationto the
training or test sets beyond the normalization that
occurs as a preprocessing step (hamza normaliza-
tion, replacement of problematic characters). We
build a word-based 4-gram language model using
the 64000 most frequent words and Good-Turing
smoothing.
For the AFFIX model, we first define the charac-
ter strings that are considered affixes. We use the
same list of affixes as in Xiang et al. (2006), which
includes 12 prefixes and 34 suffixes. We add to the
lists all combinations of two prefixes and two suf-
fixes. We extract the vocabulary from the training
data, and for each word, propose a single segmenta-
tion, based on the following constraints:
1. Ifthewordhasanacceptableprefix-stem-suffix
decomposition, such that the stem is at least 3
characterslong, choose it as the correct decom-
position.
2. If only one affix is found, make sure the re-
mainder is at least 3 characters long, and is not
also a possible affix.
3. If the word has prefix-stem and stem-suffix de-
compositions, use the longest affix.
4. If the longestprefixand longestsuffix are equal
length, choose the prefix-stem decomposition.
We build a dictionary that relates each word to a
single segmentation (or no segmentation). We seg-
ment the training and test texts by replacing each
word with its segmentation. Morphemes are sepa-
rated by whitespace. The language model is built by
counting 4-grams over the training data, then using
onlythemostfrequent64000morphemesinestimat-
ing a language model with Good-Turing smoothing.
40
WORD AFFIX FSM-LM
Avg Neg
Log Prob
4.65 5.30 4.56
Coverage (%):
Unigram 96.03 99.30 98.89
Bigram 17.81 53.13 69.56
Trigram 1.52 11.89 27.25
Four-gram .37 3.42 9.62
Table 2: Average negative log probability and coverage
results for one experimental language model (FSM-LM)
and two baseline language models. Results are averages
over 10 folds.
5 Evaluation
For each model, the test set undergoes the same ma-
nipulation as the train set; words are left alone for
the WORD model, split into a single segmentation
each for the AFFIX model, or their FSM decompo-
sitions are concatenated.
Language models are often compared using the
perplexity statistic:
PP(x1 ...xn) = 2−1n
summationtextn
xi=4 logP(xi|x
i−3
i−1) (1)
Perplexityrepresentstheaveragebranchingfactorof
a model; that is, at each point in the test set, we cal-
culate the entropy of the model. Therefore, a lower
perplexity is desired.
In the AFFIX and FSM-LM models, each word is
splitintoseveralparts. Therefore,the value 1n would
be approximatelythree times smaller for these mod-
els, giving them an advantage. To make a more even
comparison, we calculate the geometric mean of the
n-gramtransitionprobabilities,dividingbythenum-
ber of words in the test set, not morphemes, as in
Kirchhoff et al. (2006). The log of this equation is:
AvgNegLogProb(x1 ...xn) =
− 1N
nsummationdisplay
i=4
logP(xi|xi−3i−1) (2)
wherenisthenumberofmorphemesorwordsinthe
test set, depending on the model, and N is the num-
berof words inthetestset, andlog P(xi|xi−3i−1) isthe
log probability of the item xi given the 3-item his-
tory(calculatedinbase10, asthisishowtheSRILM
Toolkit is implemented). Again, we are looking for
a low score.
In the FSM-LM, each test sentence is represented
by a lattice of paths. To determine the negative log
probability of the sentence, we score all paths of
the sentence according to the equations above, and
record the maximum probability. This reflects the
likely procedure we would use in implementing this
model within an ASR task.
We see in Table 2 that the average negative log
probability of the FSM-LM is lower than that of
either the WORD or AFFIX model. The average
across 10 folds reflects the pattern of scores for each
fold. We conclude from this that the FSM model
of predicting morphemes is more effective than -
or more conservatively, at least as effective as a
static decomposition, as in the AFFIX model. Fur-
thermore, we have successfully reproduced the re-
sults of Xiang et al. (2006) and Kirchhoff et al.(2006), among others, that modeling Arabic with
morphemes is more effective than modeling with
whole word forms.
We also calculatethe coverage of each model: the
percentageof unitsin the testset that are given prob-
abilities in the language model. For the FSM model,
only the morphemes in the best path are counted.
The coverage results are reported in Table 2 as the
average coverage over the 10 folds. Both the AF-
FIX and FSM-LM models showed improved cover-
age as compared to the WORD model, as expected.
This means that we reduce the OOV problem by us-
ing morphemes instead of whole words. The AF-
FIX model has the best coverage of unigrams be-
cause only new stems, not new affixes, are proposed
in the test set. That is, the same fixed set of affixes
are used to decompose the test set as the train set,
however, unseem stems may appear. In the FSM-
LM, there are no restrictions on the affixes, there-
fore, unseen affixes may appear in the test set, as
wellasnewstems,loweringtheunigramcoverageof
the test set. For larger n-grams, however, the FSM-
LM model has the best coverage. This is due to
keeping all decompositions until test time, then al-
lowing the language model to define the most likely
sequences, rather than specifying a single decompo-
sition for each word.
A 4-gram of words will tend to cover more con-
text than a 4-gram of morphemes; therefore, the
word 4-grams will exhibit more sparsity than the
morpheme 4-grams. We compare, for a single train-
41
WORD AFFIX FSM-LM
unigrams 4.97 5.84 5.60
bigrams 4.95 5.70 4.61
trigrams 4.95 5.69 4.56
four-grams 4.95 5.69 4.57
Table 3: Comparison of n-gram orders across language
model types.
test fold, how lower order n-grams compare among
the models. The results are shown in Table 3. We
find that for lower-order n-grams, the word model
performs best. As the n-grams get larger, the spar-
sityproblemfavorstheFSM-LM,whichhasthebest
overall score of all models shown. Apparently, the
frequencies of 3and 4-grams are not big enough
to make a big difference in the evaluation. This is
likely due to the small size of our corpus, and we
expect the result would change if we were to use all
of the TDT4 corpus, rather than a 100 file portion of
the corpus.
6 Conclusion
& Future Work
It has been shown that reduced perplexity scores do
not necessarily correlate with reduced word error
ratesinanASRtask(Bertonetal., 1996). Thisisbe-
causetheperplexity(orinthiscase,averagenegative
log probability) statistic does not take into account
the acoustic confusability of the items being consid-
ered. However, the average negative log probability
score is a useful tool as a proof-of-concept, giving
us reason to believe that we may be successful in
implementing this model within an ASR task.
The real test of this model is its ability to predict
short vowels. The average negative log probability
scores may lead us to believe that the FSM-LM is
only marginally better than the WORD or AFFIX
model, and the differences may not be apparent in
an ASR application. However, only the FSM-LM
model allows for the opportunity to predict short
vowels, by arranging the FSMs as finite state trans-
ducers with short vowel informationencoded as part
of the stem patterns.
We will continue to tune the language model by
applying the language model weights to the decom-
positionpathsandre-estimatingthelanguagemodel.
Also, we will expand the language model to include
more training data. We will implement the model
within an Arabic ASR system, with and without
short vowel hypotheses. Furthermore, we are inter-
ested to see how well the application of these tem-
plates and this framework will apply to other Arabic
dialects.

References

A Berton, P Fetter, and P Regel-Brietzmann. 1996.
Compound words in large vocabulary German speech
recognition system. In Proceedings of ICSLP 96,
pages 1165–1168.

K. Carki, P. Geutner, and T. Schultz. 2000. Turkish
lvcsr: Towards better speech recognition for aggluti-
native languages. In ICASSP 2000, pages 134–137.

William A. Gale and Geoffrey Sampson. 1995. Good-
Turing frequency estimation without tears. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics, 22:217–37.

P Geutner. 1995. Using morphology towards better
large-vocabulary speech recognition systems. In Pro-
ceedings of ICASSP-95, volume 1, pages 445–448.

J.A. Haywood and H.M. Nahmad. 1965. A New Arabic
Grammar of the Written Language. Lund Humphries,
Burlington, VT.

Teemu Hirsim¨aki, Mathias Creutz, Vesa Siivola, Mikko
Kurimo, Sami Virpioja, and Janne Pylkk¨onen. 2006.
Unlimited vocabulary speech recognition with morph
language models applied to Finnish. Computer Speech
and Language, 20:515–541.

F. Jelinek,B.Merialdo,S.Roukos, andM.Strauss. 1991.
A dynamic language model for speech recognition. In
Proc. Wkshp on Speech and Natural Language, pages
293–295, Pacific Grove, California. ACL.

Katrin Kirchhoff, Dimitra Vergyri, Kevin Duh, Jeff
Bilmes, and Andreas Stolcke. 2006. Morphology-
based language modeling for conversational Arabic
speech recognition. Computer Speech and Language,
20(4):589–608.

Junbo Kong and David Graff. 2005. TDT4 multilingual
broadcast news speech corpus.
Oh-Wook Kwon. 2000. Performance of LVCSR with
morpheme-basedand syllable-basedrecognitionunits.
In Proceedings of ICASSP ’00, volume 3, pages 1567–

Andreas Stolcke. 2002. SRILM an extensible lan-
guage modeling toolkit. In Proc. Intl. Conf. Spoken
Language Processing, Denver, Colorado.

Wen Wang and Dimitra Vergyri. 2006. The use of word
n-grams and parts of speech for hierarchical cluster
language modeling. In Proceedings of ICASSP 2006,
pages 1057–1060.

Bing Xiang, Kham Nguyen, Long Nguyen, Richard
Schwartz, and John Makhoul. 2006. Morphological
decomposition for Arabic broadcast news transcrip-
tion. In Proc. ICASSP 2006, pages 1089–1092.

