Tutorial Abstracts of ACL 2010, page 4,
Uppsala, Sweden, 11 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Anotation 
Eduard Hovy 
Information Sciences Institute 
University of Southern California 
email: hovy@isi.edu 
 
1. Introduction 
As researchers sek to aply their machine 
learning algorithms to new problems, corpus 
anotation is increasingly gaining importance 
in the NLP comunity. But since the 
comunity curently has no general paradigm, 
no textbok that covers al the isues (though 
Wilcock’s bok published in Dec 209 covers 
some basic ones very wel), and no acepted 
standards, seting up and performing smal-, 
medium-, and large-scale anotation projects 
remains something of an art.  
To atend, no special expertise in computation 
or linguistics is required.  
2. Content Overview 
This tutorial is intended to provide the atende 
with an in-depth lok at the procedures, isues, 
and problems in corpus anotation, and 
highlights the pitfals that the anotation 
manager should avoid. The tutorial first 
discuses why anotation is becoming 
increasingly relevant for NLP and how it fits 
into the generic NLP methodology of train-
evaluate-aply. It then reviews curently 
available resources, services, and frameworks 
that suport someone wishing to start an 
anotation project easily. This includes the 
QDAP anotation center, Amazon’s 
Mechanical Turk, anotation facilities in 
GATE, and other resources such as UIMA. It 
then discuses the seven major open isues at 
the heart of anotation for which there are as 
yet no standard and fuly satisfactory answers 
or methods.  Each isue is described in detail 
and curent practice is shown.  The seven 
isues are: 1. How does one decide what 
specific phenomena to anotate?  How does 
one adequately capture the theory behind the 
phenomenon/a and expres it in simple 
anotation instructions? 2. How does one 
obtain a balanced corpus to anotate, and 
when is a corpus balanced (and 
representative)? 3. When hiring anotators, 
what characteristics are important? How does 
one ensure that they are adequately (but not 
overor under-) trained?  4. How does one 
establish a simple, fast, and trustworthy 
anotation procedure? How and when does 
one aply measures to ensure that the 
procedure remains on track?  How and where 
can active learning help? 5. What interface(s) 
are best for each type of problem, and what 
should one know to avoid?  How can one 
ensure that the interfaces do not influence the 
anotation results? 6. How does one evaluate 
the results?  What are the apropriate 
agrement measures?  At which cutof points 
should one redesign or re-do the anotations? 
7. How should one formulate and store the 
results?  When, and to whom, should one 
release the corpus? How should one report the 
anotation efort and results for best impact?  
The notes include several pages of references 
and sugested readings.  
3. Tutorial Overview 
1. Toward a Science of Anotation 
a. What is Anotation, and Why do We 
Ned It? 
2. Seting up an Anotation Project 
a. The Basic Steps 
b. Useful Resources and Services 
3. Examples of Anotation Projects 
4. The Seven Questions of Anotation 
a. Instantiating the Theory 
b. Selecting the Corpus 
c. Designing the Anotation Interface 
d. Selecting and Training Anotators 
e. Specifying the Anotation Procedure 
f. Evaluation and Validation 
g. Distribution and Maintenance 
5. Closing: The Future of Anotation in NLP 
4

