1:15	SPONSOR: CLIF (Computational Linguistics in Flanders) INVITED SPEAKERS: Eric Brill, Microsoft Research John Nerbonne, University of Groningen PROGRAM COMMITTEE: Walter Daelemans, University of Antwerp and Tilburg University, Chair Remi Zajac, New Mexico State University, Chair Thorsten Brants, Xerox PARC Michael Brent, Washington University in Saint Louis Claire Cardie, Cornell University James Cussens, University of York Herve Dejean, University of Tuebingen, Shared Task coordinator Gregory Grefenstette, Xerox Grenoble Raymond Mooney, University of Texas at Austin John Nerbonne, Groningen University Kemal Oflazer, Sabanci University Miles Osborne, University of Edinburgh David Powers, Flinders University Ronan Reilly, University College Dublin Dan Roth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Erik Tjong Kim Sang, University of Antwerp, Shared Task coordinator Antal van den Bosch, Tilburg University Yorick Wilks, University of Sheffield CONFERENCE WEBSITE: http://lcg-www.uia.ac.be/conll2001/ PREFACE This volume contains the papers accepted for presentation at the 2001 workshop on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2001), a SIGNLL meeting held in Toulouse, France, July 6 and 7 in conjunction with the International and the European Conferences of the ACL.
2:15	CoNLL-2001 is the fifth in a series of meetings organized by SIGNLL a0, the ACL special interest group on natural language learning.
3:15	The CoNLL meeting is intended to address all aspects of computational natural language learning, including those that are not regularly discussed at computational linguistics meetings, such as computational models of human language acquisition, computational models of the origins and evolution of language, biologically-inspired learning methods etc. This year, we have a special theme on learning mechanisms for the automated acquisition of language resources (dictionaries, ontologies, grammars) or the automated adaptation of natural language resources/processors to new domains or languages.
4:15	The dimensions of learning that are of interest include the integration of humans/linguists in the learning process, the structure of the training data (especially, minimization of the training set), and the kind of knowledge that is learned.
5:15	This years CoNLL also features two invited presentations, one by Eric Brill on whether the web changes empirical NLP, and one by John Nerbonne on the results of a successful European project on Learning Computational Grammars.
6:15	As in the previous two editions of CoNLL, we have a shared task session, coordinated by Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Herve Dejean.
7:15	For this session, training and test data were made available, and researchers were invited to apply their learning system to this task.
8:15	This year the task is clause identification.
9:15	Six systems have participated, five from Europe and one from Australia.
10:15	You will find descriptions of these systems and their results in this proceedings.
11:15	Of the 61 papers submitted, the programme committee selected 20 papers, representative of the state of the art in computational language learning today.
12:15	We are very grateful to our programme committee for the effort they put in reviewing the papers.
13:15	We are also grateful to the ACL/EACL2001 conference organizers on whom we could rely for the local organization.
14:15	Finally, we most gratefully acknowledge the support of our sponsor, the Computational Linguistics in Flanders research community (CLIF) for sponsoring one of the invited speakers.
15:15	Walter Daelemans & Remi Zajac (editors) May 2001 a1 http://www.aclweb.org/signll/

