From Temporal Expressions to Temporal Information: Semantic Tagging of News Messages Frank Schilder and Christopher Habel Department for Informatics University of Hamburg Vogt-K¨olln-Str.
30 22527 Hamburg Germany a0 schilder a1habela2 @informatik.uni-hamburg.de Abstract We present a semantic tagging system for temporal expressions and discuss how the temporal information conveyed by these expressions can be extracted.
The performance of the system was evaluated wrt.
a small hand-annotated corpus of news messages.
1 Introduction
This paper describes a semantic tagging system that extracts temporal information from news messages.
Temporal expressions are defined for this system as chunks of text that express some sort of direct or inferred temporal information.
The set of these expressions investigated in the present paper includes dates (e.g.
08.04.2001), prepositional phrases (PPs) containing some time expression (e.g.
on Friday), and verbs referring to a situation (e.g.
opened). Related work by Mani and Wilson (2000) focuses only on the core temporal expressions neglecting the temporal information conveyed by prepositions (e.g.
Friday vs.
by Friday).
The main part of the system is a temporal expression tagger that employs finite state transducers based on hand-written rules.
The tagger was trained on economic news articles obtained from two German news papers and an online news agency (Financial Times Deutschland, die tageszeitung and www.comdirect.de).
Based on the syntactic classification of temporal expressions a semantic representation of the extracted chunks is proposed.
A clear-cut distinction between the syntactic tagging process and the semantic interpretation is maintained.
The advantage of this approach is that a second level is created that represents the meaning of the extracted chunks.
Having defined the semantic representation of the temporal expressions, further inferences, in particular on temporal relations, can be drawn.
Establishing the temporal relations between all events mentioned by a news article is the ultimate goal of this enterprise.
However, at the current stage of this work the semantic analysis is still in progress.
For the time being, we focus on the anchoring of the temporal expressions in the absolute time line and present an already substantial subset of a full semantics that will eventually cover the entire set of temporal expressions extracted.
Finally, the evaluation of the temporal expression tagger provides precision and recall rates for tagging temporal expressions and drawing temporal inferences.
2 Representing
time in news articles Since we focus on a particular text domain (i.e.
news articles), the classification of temporal expressions can be kept to a manageable set of classes.
2.1 Classification
of temporal expressions The main distinction we make is between timedenoting and event-denoting expressions.
The first group comprises chunks expressing temporal information that can be stated with reference to a calendar or clock system.
Syntactically speaking, these expressions are mainly expressed by prepositional, adverbial or noun phrases (e.g.
on Friday or today or the fourth quarter).
The second group, event-denoting expressions, refers to events.
These expressions have an implicit temporal dimension, since all situations possess a temporal component.
For these expressions, however, there is no direct or indirect link to the calendar or clock system.
These expressions are verb or noun phrases (e.g.
increased or the election).
2.1.1 Time-denoting expressions Temporal reference can be expressed in three different ways: Explicit reference.
Date expressions such as 08.04.2001 refer explicitly to entries of a calendar system.
Also time expressions such as 3 p.m. or Midnight denote a precise moment in our temporal representation system.
Indexical reference.
All temporal expressions that can only be evaluated via a given index time are called indexical.
Expressions such as today, by last week or next Saturday need to be evaluated wrt.
the article’s time stamp.
Vague reference.
Some temporal expressions express only vague temporal information and it is rather difficult to precisely place the information expressed on a time line.
Expressions such as in several weeks, in the evening or by Saturday the latest cannot be represented by points or exact intervals in time.
For the given domain of news article, the extraction of a time stamp for the given article is very important.
This time stamp represents the production time of the news information and is used by the other temporal expressions as an index time to compute the correct temporal meaning of the expression.
Note that an explicit date expression such as 24.12. can only be evaluated wrt.
the year that the article was written.
This means that even an explicit temporal expression can contain some degree of indexicality.
2.1.2 Event-denoting expressions Two types of event-denoting expressions have to be distinguished, on the one hand, sentences, and, on the other, specific noun phrases.
In the former case, the verb is the lexical bearer of information about the event in question, in the latter case, specific nouns, especially those created by nominalisation, refer to an event.
Since temporal information is the topic of the system described in this paper, only a subset of event-denoting nouns have to be considered.
These expressions — as election in the phrase after the election — which serve as temporal reference pointers in building the temporal structure of a news, can be marked by a specific attribute in their lexical entry.
Furthermore, in the text classes we have investigated, there is a small number of event nouns, which are used as domain dependent pointers to elements of temporal structures.
For the domain of business and stock market news, phrases such as opening of the stock exchange, opening bell, or the close are examples of domain specific event expressions.
2.2 Representation
of temporal information: the time domain The primary purpose of the present paper is to anchor the temporal information obtained from natural language expressions in news messages in absolute time, i.e. in a linearly ordered set of abstract time-entities, which we call time-set in the following.
One of the major tasks in this anchoring process is to augment the temporal information in case of indexical and vague temporal descriptions (see section 4.3 for more details).
Since these expressions do not specify an individual time-entity of the time-set, it is necessary to add temporal information until the temporal entity build up from natural language is fully specified, i.e. can be anchored in the time-set.
2.2.1 The
granular system of temporal entities The temporal information obtained from news messages is organised in a granular system of temporal entities including such granularity levels as GL-day,GL-week,GL-month and GLyear.1 Individual days are anchored by a 1In the present paper we focus on the conception of granularity level in semantic and pragmatic inferences.
Therefore, we do not discuss the formal notions of granular systems for temporal entities here.
Compare, e.g.
Bettini et al.(2000), for a framework of temporal granularity, which could be used for the purposes we discuss here.
date, e.g. date(2001,3,23), on the time line, i.e. the time-set.
Further information, for example, the day of the week, can also be included by an additional slot of the time entity: time = [’Fri’, date(2001,3,23)].
Time entities of coarser granularity levels, e.g. weeks, are represented on the basis of intervals, which can be determined by a start, that is an entity ofGL-day, and a specific duration: time = [’Mon’, date(2001,4,2), ’7 days’ ].
2 The
concept of temporal granularity is reflected linguistically, for example, in the use of demonstratives as determiners of time expressions in German: dieser Freitag (‘this Friday’) refers to that Friday which is located in the current week (i.e.
the time entity of the next coarser level of temporal granularity).
The same phenomenon holds with dieser Monatserste (‘this first day of the month’) In the following we will apply the granularity structure of temporal expressions only with respect to the finer than coarser than relation between levels of granularity, which is different from the is part of relation between temporal entities.
For example, whereas between days and weeks there is a unique functional relationship, namely that there is exactly one week (as standard calendar unit) that an individual day is a part of, a week can temporally overlap with one or two months (Technically, overlap can be realized by temporal relations of Allen-style; see Allen (1983)).
Nevertheless, GL-week finer than GL-month holds in the granularity system.3 2Whether the GL-week information remains implicit, i.e. is inferable from duration, or is made explicit, i.e. coded by a GL-week-stamp, depends on some design decisions dependent on the conceptual richness of domain modelling.
For example, in a standardised world of ISO-weeks, which start on Monday, only, it is not necessary to use GL-weekstamps.
On the other hand, if ISO-weeks, and business weeks—of five-day length— are conceptual alternatives, then it is appropriate to use explicit granularity-level stamps.
3The phenomena of overlapping temporal entities of different granularity systems, for example the system of calendar time-entities vs.
the system of business time-entities, or the astronomical system of seasons of the year vs.
the meteorological seasons of the year are especially relevant for processing vague and ambiguous temporal expressions.
Due to the temporal and spatial limitations of this paper, we can not go into the details here.
2.2.2 Definition
of temporal relations Temporal relations are explicitely marked by temporal prepositions (e.g.
before, on or by).
We use the following seven temporal relation: before, after, incl, at, starts, finishes, excl.
The preposition on as in on Friday, for instance, denotes the inclusion relation incl, whereas the preposition by as in by Friday is represented as finishes.
Note that the seven temporal relations employed by the current version are equivalent to sets of Allen’s interval relations (Allen, 1983).4 before a3a5a4a7a6a9a8a11a10 after a3a5a4a13a12a13a6a9a8a14a12a9a10 incl a3a7a15a16a6a13a17a18a6a13a19a20a6a13a21a23a22a24a10 at a3a7a15a25a12a26a6a13a17a7a12a26a6a13a19a20a12a26a6a13a21a7a22a18a10 starts a3a5a17a27a10 finishes a3a5a19a28a10 excl a3a5a4a7a6a13a4a29a12a26a6a9a8a30a6a9a8a14a12a26a10 Table 1: the temporal relations used 3 Extraction of temporal information Similar to other approaches to information extraction or tagging, a cascade of Finite State Transducers (FST) was employed.
The following sections provides a brief introduction to this technique before the overall system architecture is described in more detail.5 3.1 Preliminaries The temporal expression chunks are extracted via an FST.
FSTs are basically automata that have transitions labelled with a translation instruction.
A label of the form a:b indicates such an translation from a to b.
Take as an example the simple FST in figure 1.
If the input contains the sequence of the three subsequent characters a31, a32, and a33, the same output is produced with the sequence of these three characters put into brackets.
The input stream “FSTs are basically automata” is, for instance, translated, into “[FST]s are basically automata”.
4Allen (1983) proposes a temporal reasoning system that contains all 13 conceivable relations between intervals: b(efore), m(eets), o(verlaps), s(tarts), d(uring), f(inishes), the 6 reverse relations bi, mi, oi, si, di and fi and eq(ual).
5The semantic tagging system is written in SWIPROLOG 4.0.2 on Monday <CHUNK (time-denoting expression) id = t43 type = time sem = [incl,[E,t42]] time = [’Mon’,date(2001,4,2), time(,, ), gl(,day, )] > by Friday </CHUNK> ftd.de, Fr, 16.3.2001, 11:00 <CHUNK (document time stamp) id = t1 type = time ag = ’FTD’ sem = now time = [’Fri’,date(2001,3,16), time(11,00, ), gl(,second,now)] > ftd.de, Fr, 16.3.2001, 11:00 </CHUNK> closed <CHUNK (event-denoting expression) id = e23 type = event sem = close(e23) temp = [,[t(e23), ]] said </CHUNK> Table 2: Examples of tagged temporal expressions a34 a34 a35 a36 a36a38a37a40a39 a37a42a41 a43 : a43 a44 : a44a46a45 a47 : a48 a47 a37a42a49 a50 : a50 Figure 1: A simple FST 3.2 Classes of temporal information The FSTs defined are fed by the output of a Part of Speech (POS) tagger.6 The POS tagger specifies the syntactic categories and a lemma for every word of the input text.
The syntactic information is then stored in an XML file.7 Given the derived syntactic categories and the lemma information for every word of the text, several FSTs specialised into different classes of temporal expressions are run.
Temporal Expressions.
One FST consisting of 15 states and 61 arcs tags all occurrences of time6A decision-tree-based POS tagger developed by (Schmid, 1994) was integrated into the system.
7Some of the XML and HTML handling predicates the system uses stem from the PiLLoW package developed by Manuel Hermenegildo and Daniel Cabeza (URL www.clip.dia.fi.upm.es/miscdocs/pillow/pillow.html). denoting temporal expressions.
The POS information stored in an XML file as well as a predefined class of temporal lemmas are used by this FST.
The class of temporal lemmas used include days of the week (e.g.
Friday), months (e.g.
April) as well as general temporal descriptions such as midday, week or year.
Since German is a very productive language regarding compound nouns, a simple morphological analysing tool was integrated into this FST as well.
This tool captures expressions such as Rekordjahr (’record year’) or Osterferien (’Easter holiday’).
The extracted temporal expression chunks are marked by the CHUNK tag and an attribute type = time.
See the first row of table 2 for an example.
Note that the attributes sem and time carry semantic information.
The meaning of these values are explained in section 4.
detail. Document time stamp.
The document time stamp for a given article is crucial for the computation of almost all temporal expressions (e.g.
now). In particular, this index time is indispensable for the computation of all temporal expressions that express an indexical reference (see the second row of table 2).8 8This FST consists of 7 states and 15 arcs.
It also extracts the name of the newspaper or agency as indicated by the attribute ag.
So far only the newspaper names and agencies Verbal descriptions.
Another FST that contains 4 states and 27 arcs marks all verbs as previously tagged by the POS tagger.
As already pointed out these temporal expressions denote an event.
The tag for such expressions is <CHUNK type = event> </CHUNK> (see table2; third row).
Nominal descriptions.
So far there is only an experimental FST that extracts also nominal descriptions of events such as the election.
More tests have to be carried out to determine a subset of nouns for the given domain.
These nouns should then also be used to denote events mentioned in the text which can be combined with time-denoting expressions, as in after the election in May.
3.3 System
output After all expressions have been tagged, an HTML file is produced highlighting the respective expressions.
See the snapshot in figure 2.9 While reading the output stream from the FSTs temporal inferences are drawn by the system.
In particular, expressions bearing indexical references are resolved and the event descriptions are matched with the time denoting temporal expressions.
Note that the values for CHUNK attributes sem, time, and temp as indicated by the three examples in table 2 are PROLOG expressions.
While translating the tagged text a PROLOG predicate triggers other predicates that compute the correct temporal information.
An additional HTML file is also generated that contains the derived temporal information in standard ISO format, provided an explicit reference was given or was resolved.
In the case of vague reference (e.g.
afternoon) the semantic description is kept (e.g.
20:01:04:03:afternoon).10 In addition, the temporal relations holding between the events and times expressed mentioned by the article of the training set can be extracted.
A future version of the temporal expressions tagger should also be capable of tagging previously unknown names.
However, note that this is rather a named entity recognition task and therefore goes beyond the scope of this paper.
9Time-denoting expressions are indicated by a dark (or magenta) background, while event-denoting expressions are indicated by a lighter (or yellow) background.
The document time stamp is tagged by a very dark (or green) background.
10Future research will focus on the temporal inferences that can be drawn with these vague descriptions taking into account the different granularity levels.
by the text are stored as well.
4 Semantic
descriptions and temporal inferences 4.1 Semantics for temporal expressions With respect to processing temporal information, the crucial distinction between time-denoting and event-denoting expressions is that event-denoting expressions lack the direct link to temporal entities.
An event-denoting expression (e.g.
a verb) refers to an event of a certain type.
The verb to meet, for instance, can be formalised as a8a51a21a7a21a23a52a54a53a55a21a27a56a58a57. In order to add the temporal information to the event, a function temp is defined that gives back the time when the event occurred (i.e.
run-time of the event).
A time-denoting expression such as on Monday that is combined with the event description carries some temporal information that can further specify the run time temp(e1) of the event e1.
4.2 Semantics
for temporal prepositions PPs are the carrier of temporal relations.
The semantics for a preposition is, therefore, as follows: a59 a21a23a60a9a53a42a52a58a6a13a21a5a57 . For each preposition a temporal relation a59 a21a23a60 was defined.
The preposition by expresses, for instance, thefinishesrelation, as in by Friday.
Temporal expressions that do not contain a preposition are assumed to express an inclusion relation, as in Die Pflegeversicherung war 1995 [.
. . ] in Kraft getreten (‘the statutory health insurance coverage of nursing care for the infirm took effect in 1995’).
4.3 Derivation
of meaning The temporal information expressed by a sentence as in example sequence (1) is derived via unification of the semantic attributes derived for the temporal expression chunks.
(1) Die The US-Technologieb¨orse US-technology stock market Nasdaq Nasdaq hatte had a3 am on Montaga10 Monday mit with einem a Minus minus von of 3,11 3.11 Prozent percent bei at 1782 1782 Punkten points [geschlossen].
closed. Figure 2: A snapshot of the temporal expressions tagger ‘The Nasdaq closed with a minus of 3.11 percent at 1782 points on Monday.’ Two temporal expressions are marked by the tagger: am Montag (’on Monday’) and geschlossen (’closed’).
The former expression is a timedenoting expression that consists of a preposition and a time-denoting expression that is stored by the FST.
The derivation of the semantics for this expression is done during the tagging process for the temporal expressions.
First, the preposition am (‘on’) denoting an inclusion relation between an event and a time is processed.
The expressed temporal relation is represented by a PROLOG list (i.e.
[incl,[E,T]]).
After having processed the following noun referring to a time (i.e.
Monday), the following semantic representation is obtained via unification: sem = [incl,[E,t1]], where t1 refers to the following time stamp time = [’Mon’, date(,, ), time(,, ), gl([,’1 day’, ])].11 11Note that the underscore “ ” refers to an anonymous variable in PROLOG.
In the next step, the verbal expression tagger combines the temporal information derived for am Montag with the event representation for geschlossen.
The following semantic representation is assign to the verb geschlossen during the tagging of the verbal expressions: sem = close(e23) temp = [, [t(e23), ]].
This means that event e23 is of type closing and the run-time t(e23) of this event stands in some to-be-specified relation with another expression.
Next, the temporal information extracted by the FST specialised in time-denoting expression is unified with the value of the temp-attribute.
The result is [incl,[t(e23),t1]].
So far, only the temporal relation that the event of closing happened within a time frame of one day has been determined.
Since Montag contains an indexical reference, this reference has to be resolved.
The document time stamp is needed here.
All references regarding this index time are resolved during the generation of the HTML output file.
Accordingly, the following time stamp is generated for am Montag: time = [’Mon’, date(2001,4,2), time(,, ), gl([,’1 day’, ])].
The timeinformation is left open because the current granularity level is GL-day.
However, this information could be further specified by modifiers such as in n¨achstes Jahr (’next year’).
The third slot in gl is reserved for these modifiers.
The first slot can be filled by temporal modifier that refer to a subpart of the expressed temporal entity, as in Beginn des Jahres (’beginning of the year’).
The resulting representation of an expression such as Beginn letzten Jahres (’beginning of last year’) is gl([begin, year, last]).
4.4 Pragmatic
inferences for anchoring indexicals: The case of ’last’ Temporal expressions of the type last Friday are similar to the phenomena discussed in the section above.
German has three lexemes, namely letzt, vergangen and vorig that express this idea.
The differences in meaning are— in referring to a specific day—more of the type of individual preferences than of real alternatives in meaning.
Which day is referred to by using vorigen Montag?
This depends on the time of utterance.
In general, there seems to be a tendency to interpret this expression as synonymous to Monday of the previous week, i.e. to make use of the previous-operation on the coarser level GL-week, instead of using this operation on the level GL-day.
But, if uttered on Friday, our informants would give the Monday of the same week a preference in their interpretation.
Thus the granularity-level up strategy is not always successful.
As an alternative strategy we propose the strategy of the gliding time window.
Similar to the first proposal a granularity of weeksize is relevant, but the relevant time entity in question is centered around the focused day of the week.
In other words, looking forward and backward in time from the perspective of a Friday, the next Monday is nearer—or more activated—than the last Monday, although it is in the same calendar week.
Thus, this Monday, i.e. the last Monday, has to be marked explictly by vorige, and therefore, the Monday before this, has to be specified as Montag der vorigen Woche (‘Monday of last week’).
5 Evaluation
We evaluated the temporal expression tagger wrt.
a small corpus consisting of 10 news articles taken from Financial Times Deutschland.
We can report precision and recall rates regarding the recognition of simple temporal expressions and complex temporal expression phrases.
Based on the extracted temporal expression chunks the temporal information was derived and evaluated.
5.1 Tagging
results First, the class of simple temporal expressions was tagged and analysed.
Mani and Wilson (2000) call this class TIMEX expression (of type TIME or DATE).
We computed the precision and recall values for our data regarding this type of expressions in order to obtain a better comparability with the results obtained by this earlier study.
However, as pointed out earlier, we consider PPs carrying information regarding temporal relations as quite crucial for the derivation of temporal information.
This class of complex temporal expressions provides more detailed information about the temporal information expressed by a text.
Table 3 contains the results of the evaluation wrt.
the two classes of temporal expressions.
There was a total of 186 simple and 182 complex temporal expressions previously annotated.
Simple Complex temp.
Expr. temp.
Expr. Precision 92.11 87.30 Recall 94.09 90.66 Table 3: Performance of the temporal expressions tagger An error analysis showed that the main source of missed temporal expressions was the occurrence of a combined temporal expression, as in 2000/01.
There were 6 cases when the tagger did not correctly analyse this type of expression.
5.2 Temporal
information The analysis of the temporal expressions included an evaluation of the temporal relations derived.
Since all temporal prepositions and the class of temporal expressions that can be recognised by the FSTs come with a predefined semantics, precision and recall rates are the same.
The overall performance showed a precision and recall rate of 84.49.
As indicated by table 4, errors were only made for expressions that express an indexical reference.
These errors were in most cases due to a missing semantics assigned to the respective expression.
Since this part of the system is still work in progress, we have not yet defined a complete semantics for all temporal expression.
Hence the performance of the system regarding temporal inference is likely to improve in the future.
Reference expressed explicit implicit vague Total 49 109 7 Wrong 0 25 0 Precision 84.49 Table 4: performance of the temporal inference derivation 6 Conclusion and outlook We presented a semantic tagging system that automatically tags the occurrence of temporal expressions such as 3.
June, on Monday and last month for German news messages.
In addition, a semantics for most of the temporal expressions was defined so that temporal inferences were drawn regarding dates and events described.
A more complex set of temporal expressions as extracted by recent systems (e.g.
(Mani and Wilson, 2000)) was tagged.
Our definition of temporal expressions also includes PPs capturing temporal relations.
The system achieved an overall precision rate of 84.49 which is likely to go up as soon as the semantic definition of all temporal expressions will be completed.
Our system also covers indexical and vague temporal expressions.
Temporal reasoning and pragmatic inferences drawn on the basis of these expression is the focus of on-going and future work.
The system we described in the present paper is intended to become a part of an experimental multi-document summarisation system currently under development.
Our studies focus on financial news messages obtained from on-line information services in Germany.
The task the system has to solve is the production of summaries of the most recent — and especially, most referred to — topics.
Our experience in this domain shows that there is one topic which leads to five to twenty news messages almost every day.
These news messages are mostly unrelated, and they often only focus on the last one or two hours.
Thus a bare collection of such messages is nearly useless for a reader who wants to be informed at the end of the day.
For a user of an on-line information service summarisations of several articles on the same hot topics would have an enormous advantage compared to unsummarised collections of news messages.
The processing of temporal expressions plays a major role in building up these summaries, because temporal information is ubiquitous in this class of news.
In addition, developing stories are reported via a stream of in-coming news messages.
Producing coherent news depends heavily on the correct extraction of temporal information expressed by these messages.12 References James F.
Allen. 1983.
Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal Intervals.
Comunications of the ACM, 26(1):832–843.
Regina Barzilay, Kathleen McKeown, and Michael Elhadad.
1999. Information fusion in the context of multi-document summarization.
In Proceedings of the 37 a61a63a62 Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 550– 557, Maryland, MD, USA.
Claudio Bettini, Sushil Jajodia, and Sean X.
Wang. 2000.
Time granularities in databases, data mining, and temporal reasoning.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Inderjet Mani and George Wilson.
2000. Robust temporal processing of news.
In Proceedings of the 38 a61a63a62 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2000), Hong Kong, China.
Dragomir R.
Radev and Kathleen R.
McKeown. 1998.
Generating natural language summaries from multiple on-line sources.
Computational Linguistics, 24(3):469–500.
Helmut Schmid.
1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees.
In Proceedings of International Conference on New Methods in Language Processing .

