1:15	SPONSOR: Microsoft Research INVITED SPEAKER: Hermann Ney, RWTH-Aachen PROGRAM COMMITTEE: Kevin Knight, USC/ISI, Organizer Franz Josef Och, RWTH-Aachen, Organizer Jessie Pinkham, Microsoft Research, Organizer Deborah Coughlin, Microsoft Research, Co-organizer Srinivas Bangalore, AT&T Research Ralf Brown, CMU Francisco Casacuberta, Polytechnic Univ. of Valencia Eugene Charniak, Brown University Robert Frederking, CMU Ulf Hermjak ob, USC/ISI Bob Moore, Microsoft Research Masaaki Nagata, NTT Joseph Pentheroudakis, Microsoft Research Norbert Reithinger, DFKI Philip Resnik, Univ. of Maryland Steve Richardson, Microsoft Research Eiichiro Sumita, ATR Koichi Takeda, IBM TR Enrique Vidal, Polytechnic Univ. of Valencia Stephan Vogel, Univ. of Kaiserslautern Hideo Watanabe, IBM TRL ADDITIONAL REVIEWERS: Michele Bank o, Microsoft Research Marisa Jimenez, Microsoft Research Eric Ringger, Microsoft Research Hisami Suzuki, Microsoft Research INTRODUCTION This volume contains the papers accepted for presentation at the 2001 Workshop on Data Driven Machine Translation, which is part of the 39th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics held on July 7, 2001 in Toulouse, France.
2:15	With the increased availability of online corpora, data-dri ven approaches have become central to the NL community.
3:15	A variety of data-dri ven approaches have been used to help build Machine Translation systems example-based, statistical MT, and other machine learning approaches  and there are all sorts of possibilities for hybrid systems.
4:15	We have endea vored to bring together proponents of as man y techniques as possible to engage in a discussion of which combinations will yield maximal success in translation.
5:15	We have chosen to center the workshop on Data Driven MT, by which we mean all approaches which develop algorithms and programs to exploit data in the development of MT, primarily the use of large bilingual corpora created by human translators, and serving as a source of training data for MT systems.
6:15	To further this theme, the conference program also includes an invited talk on the subject.
7:15	We would like to thank our invited speak er, Hermann Ney, for his participation.
8:15	Organizing a workshop like this is a bit of an effort especially given what seemed to be very tight deadlines.
9:15	Luckily, we had exceptionally cooperati ve program committee members and reviewers.
10:15	From an initial slate of 26 submissions, the y selected the papers in this proceedings in a blind refereeing process.
11:15	We deeply and sincerely thank all who reviewed: we would have run aground without their efforts.
12:15	Additionally, we would like to thank Deborah Coughlin for joining us in organizing the workshop.
13:15	She was able to implement the reviewing process, organize the reception of the papers and master all the nitty-gritty without which the workshop and the proceedings could not happen.
14:15	We most gratefully acknowledge the support of our sponsor, Microsoft Research, for generous support of this acti vity.
15:15	Jessie Pinkham Franz Josef Och Kevin Knight May 2001

