Introduction to the CoNLL-2002 Shared Task: Language-Independent Named Entity Recognition Erik F.
Tjong Kim Sang CNTS Language Technology Group University of Antwerp erikt@uia.ua.ac.be Abstract We describe the CoNLL-2002 shared task: language-independent named entity recognition.
We give background information on the data sets and the evaluation method, presenta general overview of the systems that havetaken part in the task and discuss their performance.
1 Introduction
Named entities are phrases that contain the names of persons, organizations, locations, times and quantities.
Example: [PER Wol ], currently a journalist in [LOC Argentina ], played with [PER Del Bosque ] in the nal years of the seventies in [ORG Real Madrid ]. This sentence contains four named entities: Wol and Del Bosque are persons, Argentina is a location and Real Madrid is a organization.
The shared task of CoNLL-2002 concerns language-independent named entity recognition.
We will concentrate on four types of named entities: persons, locations, organizations and names of miscellaneous entities that do not belong to the previous three groups.
The participantsof the shared task have been oered training and test data for two European languages: SpanishandDutch.
Theyhave usedthe data for developing a named-entity recognition system that includes a machine learning component.
The organizers of the shared task were especially interested in approaches that make use of additional nonannotated data for improving their performance.
2 Data
and Evaluation The CoNLL-2002 named entity data consists of six les covering two languages: Spanish and Dutch 1 . Each of the languages has a training le, a development le and a test le.
The learning methods will be trained with the training data.
The development data can be used for tuning the parameters of the learning methods.
When the best parameters are found, the method can be trained on the training data and tested on the test data.
The results of the different learning methods on the test sets will be compared in the evaluation of the shared task.
The split between development data and test data has been chosen to avoid that systems are being tuned to the test data.
All data les contain one word per line with empty lines representing sentence boundaries.
Additionally each line contains a tag which states whether the word is insidea named entity or not.
The tag also encodes the type of named entity.
Here is a part of the example sentence: Wol B-PER, O currently O a O journalist O in O Argentina B-LOC, O played O with O Del B-PER Bosque I-PER Words tagged with O are outside of named entities.
The B-XXX tag is used for the rst word in a named entity of type XXX and IXXX is used for all other words in named entities of type XXX.
The data contains enti1 The data les are available from http://lcg-www.
uia.ac.be/conll2002/ner/ ties of four types: persons (PER), organizations (ORG), locations (LOC) and miscellaneous names (MISC).
The tagging scheme is a variant of the IOB scheme originally put forward by Ramshaw and Marcus (1995).
We assume that named entities are non-recursive and non-overlapping.
In case a named entityisembedded in another named entity usually only the top level entity will be marked.
The Spanish data is a collection of news wire articles made available by the Spanish EFE News Agency.
The articles are from May2000.
The annotation was carried out by the TALP Research Center 2 of the Technical Universityof Catalonia (UPC) and the Center of Language and Computation (CLiC 3 ) of the University of Barcelona (UB), and funded by the European Commission through the NAMIC project (IST1999-12392).
The data contains words and entity tags only.
The training, development and test data les contain 273037, 54837 and 53049 lines respectively.
The Dutch data consist of four editions of the Belgian newspaper "De Morgen" of 2000 (June 2, July 1, August 1 and September1).
The data was annotated as a part of the Atranos project 4 at the University of Antwerp in Belgium, Europe.
The annotator has followed the MITRE and SAIC guidelines for named entity recognition (Chinchor et al., 1999) as well as possible.
The data consists of words, entity tags and partof-speech tags which have been derived by a Dutch part-of-speech tagger (Daelemans et al., 1996).
Additionally the article boundaries in the text have been marked explicitly with lines containing the tag -DOCSTART-.
Thetraining, development and test data les contain 218737, 40656 and 74189 lines respectively.
The performance in this task is measured with F =1 rate which is equal to ( 2 +1)*precision*recall / ( 2 *precision+recall) with =1 (van Rijsbergen, 1975).
Precision is the percentage of named entities found by the learning system that are correct.
Recall is the percentage of named entities present in the corpus that are found by the system.
A named entity is correct only if it is an exact match of the corresponding entity in the data le.
2 http://www.talp.upc.es/ 3 http://clic.
l.ub.es/ 4 http://atranos.esat.kuleuven.ac.be/ 3 Results Twelve systems have participated in this shared task.
The results for the test sets for Spanish and Dutch can be found in Table 1.
A baseline rate was computed for both sets.
It was produced by a system which only identi ed entities which had a unique class in the training data.
If a phrase was part of more than one entity, the system would select the longest one.
All systems that participated in the shared task have outperformed the baseline system.
McNamee and May eld (2002) have applied support vector machines to the data of the shared task.
Their system used many binary features for representing words (almost 9000).
They have evaluated dierent parameter settings of the system and have selected a cascaded approach in which rst entity boundaries were predicted and then entity classes (Spanish test set: F =1 =60.97;; Dutch test set: F =1 =59.52).
Black and Vasilakopoulos (2002) have evaluated two approaches to the shared task.
The rst was a transformation-based method which generated in rules in a single pass rather than in many passes.
The second method was a decision tree method.
They found that the transformation-based method consistently outperformed the decision trees (Spanish test set: F =1 =67.49;; Dutchtestset:F =1 =56.43) Tsukamoto, Mitsuishi and Sassano (2002) used a stacked AdaBoost classi er for nding named entities.
They found that cascading classi ers helped improved performance.
Their nal system consisted of a cascade of ve learners eachofwhich performed 10,000 boosting rounds (Spanish test set: F =1 =71.49;; Dutch test set: F =1 =60.93) Malouf (2002) tested dierent models with the shared task data: a statistical baseline model, a Hidden Markov Model and maximum entropy models with dierent features.
The latter proved to perform best.
The maximum entropy models bene ted from extra feature which encoded capitalization information, positional information and information about the current word being part of a person name earlier in the text.
However, incorporating a list of person names in the training process did not help (Spanish test set: F =1 =73.66;; Dutch test set: F =1 =68.08) Jansche (2002) employed a rst-order Markov model as a named entity recognizer.
His system used two separate passes, one for extracting entity boundaries and one for classifying entities.
He evaluated dierent features in both subprocesses.
The categorization process was trained separately from the extraction process but that did not seem to have harmed overall performance (Spanish test set: F =1 =73.89;; Dutch test set: F =1 =69.68) Patrick, Whitelaw and Munro (2002) present SLINERC, a language-independent named entity recognizer.
The system uses tries as well as character n-grams for encoding word-internal and contextual information.
Additionally,itrelies on lists of entities which have been compiled from the training data.
The overall system consists of six stages, three regarding entity recognition and three for entity categorization.
Stages use the output of previous stages for obtaining an improved performance (Spanish test set: F =1 =73.92;; Dutch test set: F =1 =71.36) Tjong Kim Sang (2002) has applied a memory-based learner to the data of the shared task.
He used a two-stage processing strategy as well: rst identifying entities and then classifying them.
Apart from the base classi er, his system made use of three extra techniques for boosting performance: cascading classi ers (stacking), feature selection and system combination.
Each of these techniques were shown to be useful (Spanish test set: F =1 =75.78;; Dutch test set: F =1 =70.67).
Burger, Henderson and Morgan (2002) have evaluated three approaches to nding named entities.
They started with a baseline system which consisted of an HMM-based phrase tagger.
They gave the tagger access to a list of approximately 250,000 named entities and the performance improved.
After this several smoothed word classes derived from the available data were incorporated into the training process.
The system performed better with the derived word lists than with the external named entity lists (Spanish test set: F =1 =75.78;; Dutch test set: F =1 =72.57).
Cucerzan and Yarowsky (2002) approached the shared task by using word-internal and contextual information stored in character-based tries.
Their system obtained good results by using part-of-speech tag information and employing the one sense per discourse principle.
The authors expect a performance increase when the system has access to external entity lists but have not presented the results of this in detail (Spanish test set: F =1 =77.15;; Dutch test set: F =1 =72.31).
Wu, Ngai, Carpuat, Larsen and Yang (2002) have applied AdaBoost.MH to the shared task data and compared the performance with that of a maximum entropy-based named entity tagger.
Their system used lexical and part-of-speech information, contextual and word-internal clues, capitalization information, knowledge about entity classes of previous occurrences of words and a small external list of named entity words.
The boosting techniques operated on decision stumps, decision trees of depth one.
They outperformed the maximum entropy-based named entity tagger (Spanish test set: F =1 =76.61;; Dutch test set: F =1 =75.36).
Florian (2002) employed three stacked learners for named entity recognition: transformation-based learning for obtaining base-level non-typed named entities, Snow for improving the quality of these entities and the forward-backward algorithm for nding categories for the named entities.
The combination of the three algorithms showed a substantially improved performance when compared with a single algorithm and an algorithm pair (Spanish test set: F =1 =79.05;; Dutch test set: F =1 =74.99).
Carreras, Marquez and Padro (2002) have approached the shared task by using AdaBoost applied to xed-depth decision trees.
Their system used many dierent input features contextual information, word-internal clues, previous entity classes, part-of-speechtags(Dutchonly) and external word lists (Spanish only).
It processed the data in twostages: rst entity recognition and then classi cation.
Their system obtained the best results in this shared task for both the Spanish and Dutch test data sets (Spanish test set: F =1 =81.39;; Dutch test set: F =1 =77.05).
4 Concluding
Remarks We have described the CoNLL-2002 shared task: language-independent named entity recognition.
Twelve dierent systems have been applied to data covering twoWestern European languages: Spanish and Dutch.
A boosted decision tree method obtained the best performance on both data sets (Carreras et al., 2002).
Acknowledgements Tjong Kim Sang is supported by IWT STWW as a researcher in the ATRANOS project.
References William J.
Blackand ArgyriosVasilakopoulos.
2002. Language-independentnamed entity classi cation by modi ed transformation-basedlearning and by decision tree induction.
In Proceedings of CoNLL2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
John D.
Burger, John C.
Henderson, and William T.
Morgan. 2002.
Statistical named entity recognizer adaptation.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.
Taipei, Taiwan.
Xavier Carreras, Llus Marques, and Llus Padro.
2002. Named entity extraction using adaboost.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Nancy Chinchor, EricaBrown, Lisa Ferro, and Patty Robinson.
1999. 1999 Named Entity Recognition Task De nition.
MITRE and SAIC.
Silviu Cucerzan and David Yarowsky.
2002. Language independent ner using a uni ed model of internal and contextual evidence.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Peter Berck, and Steven Gillis.
1996. Mbt: A memory-based part of speech tagger-generator.
In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 1427.
Copenhagen, Denmark.
Radu Florian.
2002. Named entity recognition as a house of cards: Classi er stacking.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Martin Jansche.
2002. Named entity extraction with conditional markov models and classi ers.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Robert Malouf.
2002. Markov models for languageindependent named entity recognition.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Paul McNamee and James May eld.
2002. Entity extraction without language-speci c resources.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Jon Patrick, Casey Whitelaw, and Robert Munro.
2002. Slinerc: The sydney language-independent named entity recogniserand classi er.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Lance A.
Ramshaw and Mitchell P.
Marcus. 1995.
Text chunking using transformation-based learning.
In Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Very Large Corpora, pages 8294.
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Erik F.
Tjong Kim Sang.
2002. Memory-based named entity recognition.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
Koji Tsukamoto, Yutaka Mitsuishi, and Manabu Sassano.
2002. Learning with multiple stacking for named entity recognition.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan.
C.J. van Rijsbergen.
1975. Information Retrieval.
Buttersworth. Dekai Wu, Grace Ngai, Marine Carpuat, Jeppe Larsen, and Yongsheng Yang.
2002. Boosting for named entity recognition.
In Proceedings of CoNLL-2002.Taipei, Taiwan .

