1:18	ORGANIZERS: Yuqing Gao, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center Alex Waibel, Carnegie Mellon University and University of Karlsruhe PROGRAM COMMITTEE: Yuqing Gao IBM T.J. Watson Research Center (USA) Hakan Erdogan IBM T.J. Watson Research Center (USA) Alex Waibel Carnegie Mellon University (USA) & University of Karlsruhe (Germany) Michael Picheny IBM T.J. Watson Research Center (USA) Seiichi Yamamoto ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories (Japan) Gianni Lazzari ITC-IRST (Italy) Taiyi Huang Chinese Academy of Sciences (P.R. China) ADDITIONAL REVIEWERS: Fu-hua Liu, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center PANELISTS: Tim Anderson, Air Force Research Lab (AFRL) Jim Bass, DARPA Melissa Holland, Army Research Lab (ARL) Gianni Lazzari, ITC-IRST David Nahamoo, IBM Giuseppe Riccardi, AT&T Nino Varile, EU Alex Waibel, CMU Seiichi Yamamoto, ATR INVITED PAPER: Eiichiro Sumita, ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories INTRODUCTION This volume contains the papers accepted for presentation at the ACL02 Workshop on Speechto-Speech Translation, held at the University of Philadelphia on July 11, 2002 in parallel with the ACL02 conference.
2:18	We solicited papers from researchers from all over the world working on different approaches to the speech translation problem.
3:18	We looked for papers that would demonstrate the current state-ofthe-art in the field; describe various application settings, and expose some of the challenges that still lie before the community.
4:18	We were impressed by the quality and breadth of coverage of the papers submitted to the workshop.
5:18	The published papers reflect a balanced mix of theory and practice.
6:18	In addition to the papers, the workshop also features an invited paper by Dr. Eiichiro Sumita from ATR Spoken Language Translation Research Laboratories and a panel discussion.
7:18	The panel discussion brings together leaders and policy makers from academia, industry and government to discuss future research directions required by real world application difficulities.
8:18	We thank our panelists, Drs.
9:18	Tim Anderson, Jim Bass, Melissa Holland, Gianni Lazzari, David Nahamoo, Giuseppe Riccardi, Nino Varile, Alex Waibel and Seiichi Yamamoto, for their participation.
10:18	Organizing a workshop like this is not an easy affair.
11:18	Luckily, we had an excellent crew on board.
12:18	Our program committee members Hakan Erdogan, Michael Picheny, Seiichi Yamamoto, Gianni Lazzari and Taiyi Huang gave their valuable time and expertise to help us with the organization and paper reviews.
13:18	Among the submissions, the reviewers selected the papers in this proceedings in a double-blind refereeing process.
14:18	We deeply and sincerely thank all who reviewed.
15:18	It would have been impossible to finish the process timely without their help.
16:18	This workshop would not have been possible without the support of the workshop chair Walter Daelemans.
17:18	We most gratefully acknowledge his support as well as the efforts of the publication chair Dragomir Radev, the program chairs Eugene Charniak and Dekang Lin, and all other ACL02 organizers.
18:18	Yuqing Gao Alex Waibel May 2002

