A Flexemic Tagset for Polish
Adam Przepi rkowski
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences
adamp@ipipan.waw.pl
Marcin Woli·nski
Institute of Computer Science
Polish Academy of Sciences
wolinski@ipipan.waw.pl
Abstract
The article notes certain weaknesses of
current efforts aiming at the standard-
ization of POS tagsets for morphologi-
cally rich languages and argues that, in
order to achieve clear mappings between
tagsets, it is necessary to have clear
and formal rules of delimiting POSs and
grammatical categories within any given
tagset. An attempt at constructing such
a tagset for Polish is presented.
1 Introduction
The aim of this article is to address one of the ob-
jectives of the EACL 2003 workshop on Morpho-
logical Processing of Slavic Languages, namely,
to  try to reveal lexical structures necessary for
morphological analysis and. . . discuss standard-
ization efforts in the  eld that can, for instance,
enable transfer of applied methods from one lan-
guage to the other or inform the annotation of mor-
phological information in corpora. 
One admirable standardization effort in the  eld
of Slavic part of speech (POS) tagging has been
the Multext-East project (Erjavec, 2001), one of
whose aims was to construct mutually compati-
ble tagsets for 8 European languages, including 4
Slavic languages (originally Bulgarian, Czech and
Slovene, later extended to Croatian); additionally,
a Multext-East-style tagset for Russian was con-
structed at the University of T bingen (http:
//www.sfb441.uni-tuebingen.de/c1/
tagset.html). Those tagsets are based on a
common repertoire of grammatical classes (POSs;
e.g., ‘verb’, ‘noun’, ‘adjective’, etc.) and gram-
matical categories (e.g., ‘case’, ‘person’, ‘gender’,
etc.), and each tagset uses just a subset of those
grammatical classes and categories.
Despite the considerable success of Multext-
East, and the apparent uniformity of the result-
ing tagsets, certain weaknesses of this approach
are clear. First of all, the relative uniformity of
the POS classes across the 8 languages was at-
tained at the cost of introducing the grammatical
category ‘type’ whose values re ect the consider-
able differences between POS systems of the lan-
guages involved. Second, it is not clear that vari-
ous grammatical categories and their values have
the same interpretation in each language; for ex-
ample, it is rather surprising that only the Roma-
nian tagset explicitly mentions strong and weak
pronominal forms, it is not clear whether negative
pronouns in Romanian, Slovene, Czech and Bul-
garian are negative in the same sense of participat-
ing in Negative Concord, it is not clear why Roma-
nian has negative adverbs while, say, Czech lacks
them, etc. Finally, and most importantly from our
point of view, the approach adopted by Multext-
East does not clearly re ect cross-linguistic cor-
respondences, such as the one mentioned in (Er-
javec, 2001), that  in the Romanian case system
the value ‘direct’ con ates ‘nominative’ and ‘ac-
cusative’, while the value ‘oblique’ con ates ‘gen-
itive’ and ‘dative’. Such correspondences are not
exceptional, e.g., the at least three masculine gen-
ders of Polish (Ma·nczak, 1956; Saloni, 1976) are
mapped into the single masculine gender of many
other languages, the dual and the plural numbers
of some languages (Slovene, Czech) are mapped
to plural of other languages, etc.
In more general terms, we have identi ed the
following features of currently used tagsets for
Slavic in general and Polish in particular which
seem problematic from the point of view of their
reusability and cross-linguistic applicability:
a0 uncritical adoption of traditional and some-
times ill-de ned POS classes, such as ‘pro-
noun’ or vaguely delimited classes such as
‘verb’ or ‘noun’ (it is often not clear whether
gerunds are ‘verbs’ or ‘nouns’ in such classi-
 cations);
a0 POS classes and categories are often chosen
on the basis of a mix of morphological, syn-
tactic and semantic criteria, e.g., ‘gender’ in
Slavic is sometimes de ned on the basis of
mixed morphosyntactic and semantic proper-
ties, and so are ‘pronoun’ and ‘numeral’;
a0 mixing morphosyntactic annotation with
what might be called dictionary annotation;
e.g., tagsets often include tags for proper
names or morphosyntactically transparent
collocations, which  in our opinion  do
not belong to the realm of POS annotation;
a0 sometimes the priorities of such mixed cri-
teria are unclear, e.g., should the preposition
of in District of Columbia be tagged as an
ordinary preposition, or should it have the
‘proper’ tag as it is a part of a proper name?
a0 ignoring the  ner points of the morphosyn-
tactic system of a given language, e.g.,
the multitude of genders in languages such
as Polish, or categories such as ‘post-
prepositionality’ and ‘accommodability’ (see
below);
a0 unclear segmentation rules (should so-called
analytic tenses or re exive verbs be treated as
single units for the purpose of annotation?).
The main thesis of this paper is that, in order for
a tagset to be reusable and comparable with simi-
lar tagsets for related languages, it must be based
on a homogeneous set of clear formal (morpho-
logical and morphosyntactic) criteria. Only once
such criteria for delimiting grammatical classes
and categories are presented in detail, can those
classes and categories be mapped to grammati-
cal classes and categories of other similarly con-
structed tagsets.
The remainder of the paper presents such a
tagset for Polish, developed within a Polish cor-
pus project1 and deployed by a stochastic tagger
of Polish (D ebowski, 2003).
2 A
Flexemic Tagset for Polish
The tagset presented in this section is based on the
following design assumptions:
a0 what is being tagged is a single orthographic
word or, in some well-de ned cases, a part
thereof; multi-word constructions, even those
sometimes considered to be morphological
formations (so-called analytic forms) or dic-
tionary entries (proper names), should be
considered by a different level of process-
ing;2 cf. 2.1;
a0 grammatical categories re ect various oppo-
sitions in the morphological system, even
those oppositions which pertain to single
grammatical classes and are not recognized
by traditional grammars; cf. 2.2;
a0 the main criteria for delimiting grammati-
cal classes are morphological (how a given
form in ects; e.g., nouns in ect for case,
but not for gender) and morphosyntactic (in
which categories it agrees with other forms;
e.g., Polish nouns do not in ect for gen-
der but they agree in gender with adjectives
and verbs); semantic criteria are eschewed;
cf. 2.3.
2.1 Segmentation
By segmentation, or tokenization, we mean the
task of splitting the input text into tokens, i.e., seg-
1An Annotated Internet-Accessible Corpus of Written Pol-
ish (with Emphasis on NLP Applications), a 3-year project
 nanced by the State Committee for Scienti c Research.
2In case of proper names, there exist many dedicated algo-
rithms and systems for  nding them in texts, often developed
within the Message Understanding Conference series.
ments of texts which are subject to morphosyntac-
tic tagging. We propose the following guidelines
for segmentation (for a more complete discussion
see our other article in this volume):
a0 tokens do not contain white space;
a0 tokens either are punctuation marks or do not
contain any punctuation marks;
a0 an exception to the previous guideline are
certain words containing the hyphen (e.g.,
mass-media, s-ka = an abbreviation of sp  ka
‘company’, etc.) and apostrophe used in Pol-
ish when in ecting foreign names (e.g. La-
grange’a); they are given by a list.
Those guidelines do not preculde the situation
where an orthographic word is split into several
POS tokens. For example, in the case of Polish
past tense  nite verbs, the morpheme bearing in-
formation on person and number can be attached
to the verb itself (1a) or to some other word within
the sentence (1b). For that reason we always con-
sider such a ‘ oating in ection’ morpheme as a
separate segment.3
(1) a. Dlaczego
Why
mi
I-dat
nie
not
powiedzia a·s?
told be-you
‘Why haven’t you told me?’
b. Dlaczego·s
Why be-you
mi
I-dat
nie
not
powiedzia a?
told
2.2 Morphological
Categories
Although we proposed ignoring some information
often present in tagsets, e.g., the ‘proper noun’ vs.
‘common noun’ distinction, we argue that mor-
phological categories should be taken seriously
and should be as detailed as possible.
What follows is the complete list of morpholog-
ical categories assumed in the proposed tagset:
a0 number: sg, pl;
a0 case: nom, acc, gen, dat, inst, loc, voc;
a0 gender: masculine personal m1 (facet), mas-
culine animate m2 (ko·n), masculine inani-
mate m3 (st  ), feminine f (kobieta,  zyrafa,
3Segmentation, as understood in the present context, is
discussed at length in (Przepi rkowski and Woli·nski, 2003).
ksi  a zka), two neuter genders n1 (dziecko), n2
(okno), and three plurale tantum genders p1
(wujostwo), p2 (drzwi), p3 (okulary);
a0 person: pri, sec, ter;
a0 degree: pos, comp, sup;
a0 aspect: imperf, perf;
a0 negation: aff, neg;
a0 accentability (Pol.: akcentowo·s·c): akc,
nakc;
a0 post-prepositionality (Pol.: poprzyimko-
wo·s·c): praep, npraep;
a0 accommodability (Pol.: akomodacyjno·s·c):
congr, rec;
a0 agglutination (Pol.: aglutynacyjno·s·c): nagl,
agl;
a0 vocability (Pol.: wokaliczno·s·c): wok, nwok.
It may seem surprising, at  rst, to see 9 gender
values in an Indo-European language (as opposed
to, say, a Bantu language), but this position is well
argued for by (Saloni, 1976), who distinguishes
those genders on the basis of agreement with ad-
jectives and numerals;4 we will not attempt to fur-
ther justify this position here.
Negation is a category of various de-verbal
classes, e.g., participles. Since we assume that the
words pisz  acy ‘writing’ and niepisz  acy ‘not writ-
ing’ have the same lemma pisa·c ’to write’, these
words have to be distinguished with this morpho-
logical category.
The category of accentability is used to dif-
ferentiate accented forms of nominal pronouns
(e.g. jego, mnie) from weak forms (go, mi). It
roughly corresponds to the category of clitic used
in Multext-East.
Post-prepositionality is another category of
nominal pronouns. It differentiates special forms
4Elsewhere, we propose reducing the number of gen-
ders, essentially, by factoring out the number information
(Woli·nski, 2001) or the information about agreement with nu-
merals (Przepi rkowski et al., 2002), but for the purposes of
this tagset we assume the original repertoire of genders pro-
posed by Saloni.
used only directly after a preposition (e.g., niego,
-·n) from forms that can be used in other contexts
(jego, go).
The category of accomodability is important for
the description of Polish numeral-nominal phrase.
Some Polish numerals have forms that agree in
case with noun (marked congr), as well as forms
that require a noun in genitive case (marked rec):
(2) Przyszli
came
dwaj
two-nom.congr
ch opcy.
boys-nom
‘Two boys came.’
(3) Przysz o
came
dw ch/dwu
two-nom.rec
ch opc w
boys-gen
‘Two boys came.’
The need for the category of agglutination is a
result of the way past tense verb forms are seg-
mented (cf. (1) in sec. 2.1). For the majority of
Polish verbs the form used for the  rst and the sec-
ond person is the same as the third person form:
(4) a. Ty
you
przyszed e·s.
came
b. On
he
przyszed .
came
But for some verbs these forms differ:
(5) a. Ty
you
nios (nagl)e·s.
carried
b. On
he
ni s (agl).
carried
Vocability distinguishes those ‘ oating’ forms
of the verb by·c ‘to be’ which attach to consonant-
 nal forms (wok, e.g., -em) from the forms which
attach to vowelnal forms (nwok, e.g., -m).
Various non-standard categories used above,
such as post-prepositionality, accomodability and
agglutination, are based on important work by
Zygmunt Saloni and his colleagues (Saloni, 1976;
Saloni, 1977; Gruszczy·nski and Saloni, 1978;
Bie·n and Saloni, 1982).
2.3 Morphological
Classes
Morphological classes, or parts of speech, as-
sumed within various tagsets are usually taken
over more-or-less verbatim from traditional gram-
mars. For example, the Multext-East tagset for
Czech assumes the following parts of speech:
noun, verb, adjective, pronoun, adverb, adposi-
tion, conjunction, numeral, interjection, resid-
ual, abbreviation and particle.
While tagsets based on such POSs are well-
grounded in linguistic tradition, they do not repre-
sent a logically valid classi cation of wordforms
in the sense that the criteria which seem to under-
lie these classes do not always allow to uniquely
classify a given word. We will support this criti-
cism with two examples.
Let us  rst of all consider the classes pronoun
and adjective. The former is morphosyntactically
very heterogeneous:
a0 some pronouns in ect for gender (e.g., the
demonstrative pronoun ten, the possessive
pronoun m j, but not the interrogative pro-
noun kto or the negative pronoun nikt);
a0 some pronouns, but not all, in ect for per-
son;
a0 some pronouns, but not all, in ect for num-
ber;
a0 the short re exive pronoun si e does not
overtly in ect at all, although it may be con-
strued as a weak form of the anaphoric pro-
noun siebie.
It seems that the class of pronouns is de ned
mainly, if not solely, on the basis of semantic in-
tuition. On the other hand, adjectives are well-
de ned morphosyntactically, as the forms in ect-
ing for gender, number and case, but not, say,
person or voice.
Now, according to these de nitions, it is not
clear, whether so-called possessive pronouns, such
as m j ‘my’ should be classi ed as pronouns or
adjectives: semantically they belong to the for-
mer class, while morphosyntactically  to the lat-
ter. (Traditionally, it is classi ed as a pronoun, of
course.)
Another, and perhaps more serious example
concerns so-called -nie/-cie gerunds, i.e., substan-
tiva verbalia (Puzynina, 1969) such as pi·c::picie
‘to drink::drinking’, browsowa·c::browsowanie ‘to
browse::browsing’.5 These are nominal forms in
the sense that they have gender (always n2) and
in ect for case and, potentially, for number, but
they are also productively related to verbs, have
the category of aspect and in ect for negation.
As such, they do not comfortably  t into the tradi-
tional class noun, whose members do not have as-
pect or negation, nor do they belong to the class
verb, whose members have no case. A similar
dif culty is encountered also in case of adjectival
participles, which  apart from the adjectival in-
 ectional categories of gender, number and case
 also in ect for negation and have aspect.
For this reason, and following the general ap-
proach of (Saloni, 1974) and (Bie·n, 1991), we
propose to derive the notion of grammatical class
from the notion of  exeme introduced by Bie·n,
where  exeme is understood as a morphosyntac-
tically homogeneous set of forms belonging to the
same lexeme.
For example, a typical Polish verbal lexeme
contains a number of personal forms, a number
of impersonal forms, as well as, depending on
a particular understanding of the notion of lex-
eme, various deverbal forms, such as participles
and gerunds. These forms have very different
morphosyntactic properties:  nite non-past tense
forms have the in ectional categories of person
and number, adjectival participles have the in ec-
tional properties of non-gradable adjectives and,
additionally, in ect for negation and have aspect,
gerunds in ect for case and, at least potentially, for
number, but not for person, etc. Ideally,  exemes
are subsets of such lexemes consisting of those
forms which have the same in ectional proper-
ties: all verbal forms of given lexeme with the
in ectional category of person and number are
grouped into one  exeme, other forms belong-
ing to this lexeme, but with adjectival in ectional
properties, are grouped into another  exeme, those
forms, which in ect for case but not for gender
are grouped into a gerundial  exeme, etc. Each of
such  exemes is characterized by a set of gram-
matical categories it in ects for and, perhaps, a set
of grammatical categories it has lexically set (e.g.,
5The second pair illustrates the productivity of the gerun-
dial derivational rule: browsowa·c is, of course, a very recent
borrowing.
the gender of nouns).
Now, given the notion of  exeme, it is natural
to de ne grammatical classes as  exemic classes,
i.e., classes of  exemes with the same in ec-
tional characteristics. For example, the grammat-
ical class non-past verb contains exactly those
 exemes which in ect for person and number,
and nothing else, and which also have the lexi-
cal category of aspect; the class noun contains ex-
actly those  exemes which in ect for number and
case, and have gender; the class gerund contains
exactly those  exemes which in ect for number,
case and negation, and have lexical gender (always
neuter, n2, in case of gerunds) and aspect; etc.
It should be noted that, despite the way  ex-
emes have been de ned above, the notion of lex-
eme is of only secondary importance here: it is
invoked for the purpose of assigning a lemma to a
given form (e.g., a gerundial form such as przyj·s-
ciem ‘coming-inst’ will be lemmatized to the in-
 nitival form przyj·s·c ‘to come’: even though the
form przyj·s·c does not belong to the  exeme of
przyj·sciem, it does belong to the lexeme containing
przyj·sciem). Moreover, just as in case of decid-
ing whether two forms belong to the same lexeme,
also classi cation of two wordforms to the same
 exeme requires some semantic intuition: thus,
e.g., pies ‘dog-nom’ and psem ‘dog-inst’ belong
to the same (f)lexeme, and so do rok ‘year-sg’ and
lata ‘year-pl’, but pies ‘dog’ and suka ‘bitch’ do
not.
The basic classi cation of  exemes into gram-
matical (‘ exemic’) classes is given by the follow-
ing decision tree:
Inflects for case?
YES: Inflects for negation?
YES: Inflects for gender?
YES: 1. adjectival participle
NO: 2. gerund
NO: Inflects for gender?
YES: Has person?
YES: 3. nominal pronoun
NO: Inflects for number?
YES: 4. adjective
NO: 5. numeral
NO: 6. noun
NO: Inflects for gender?
YES: 7. l-participle
NO: Inflects for number?
YES: 8. (inflecting verbal forms)
NO: 9. (‘non-inflecting’ verbal
forms, adverbs, prepositions,
conjunctions)
Note that most of the classes in the ‘in ects
for case’ branch of the tree already are reason-
able POSs, i.e., they correspond to traditional
POSs (noun, adjective, numeral) or to their well-
de ned subsets (nominal pronoun, gerund, ad-
jectival participle). It is important to realize,
however, that these classes are de ned mainly on
the basis of the in ectional properties of their
members; e.g., the class numeral is much nar-
rower here than traditionally, as it does not include
so-called ordinal numerals (which, morphosyntac-
tically, are adjectives).
On the other hand, in the ‘does not in ect for
case’ branch, only the ‘in ects for gender’ class
corresponds to an intuitive set of forms, namely,
to so-called l-participles or past participles, i.e.,
verbal forms hosting ‘ oating in ections’; cf.
powiedzia a in (1) above.
The class 8. above can be further partitioned ac-
cording to the following criteria:
8. Has a ter (i.e., 3rd person) form?
YES: 8.1. non-past forms
NO: Has a pri sg form?
YES: 8.2. agglutinate
(-(e)m, -(e)·s, -·smy, -·scie)
NO: 8.3. imperative
Non-past verb forms correspond to present tense
for imperfective verbs (e.g., id e ‘I am going’) and
future tense for perfective ones (e.g., p jd e ‘I will
go’).
Further, we will remove from the class of nouns
the  exeme of the strong re exive pronoun siebie,
which does not in ect for number and does not
have overt gender:
6. Inflects for number?
YES: 6.1. true noun
NO: 6.2. siebie
Moreover, in ectional class marked as 9. can
be further split according to non-in ectional mor-
phosyntactic properties of its members in the fol-
lowing way:
9. Has aspect?
YES: 9.1. non-inflecting verbal forms
NO: Inflects for degree or derived
from adjective?
YES: 9.2. adverb
NO: 9.3. preposition, conjunction,
etc.
In order to arrive at a class close to the traditional
class of adverbs, we had to de ne this class dis-
junctively; it should contain all adverbs in ecting
for degree, at least one of which does not seem
to be derived from an adjective (bardzo ‘very’), as
well as all de-adjectival adverbs, some of which
do not (synthetically) in ect for degree (e.g., anty-
wirusowo ‘anti-virus-like’, *antywirusowiej).
If our purpose were to de ne a purely  exemic
tagset for Polish, we would have to stop here (and
remove the ‘derived from adjective’ disjunct from
the subtree above). For example, it is impossible
to distinguish the impersonal -no/-to form, the in-
 nitive, and adverbial participle of the same lex-
eme on the basis of their morphosyntactic prop-
erties alone: they all lack any in ectional cate-
gories and have the lexical category of aspect. For
this reason, we will further partition the class 9.1.
above on the basis of purely orthographic (or pho-
netic) information:
9.1. Ends in -no or -to?
YES: 9.1.1. impersonal -no/-to forms
(e.g., chodzono ‘one used to
walk/go’, pito ‘one used to
drink’)
NO: Ends in ac or -szy?
YES: 9.1.2. adverbial participle
(e.g., czytaj ac ‘reading’,
przeczytawszy ‘having read’)
NO: 9.1.3. in nitive form (e.g.,
i·s·c ‘to go’); should end
in -c or -·c
Finally, the class 9.3. consists of those word-
forms which do not in ect, and do not have as-
pect, i.e.:
9.3.1. conjunction
9.3.2. preposition
9.3.3. particle-adverb
The  rst two classes are closed classes, which can
be de ned extensionally, by enumerating them.
All other non-in ecting, non-aspectual and non-
de-adjectival single-form  exemes fall into the
particle-adverb class.
The table on the next page presents the com-
plete repertoire of grammatical classes and their
respective in ectional (‘a1 ’) and lexical (‘a2 ’) cat-
egories. Some more ephemeral classes not men-
tioned in the decision tree are brie y described
below (a more complete description of a previous
version of this tagset is available in (Woli ·nski and
Przepi rkowski, 2001)).
For Polish nouns of masculine personal (m1)
gender a stylistically marked form is possible be-
sides a ‘regular’ form for nominative and vocative
number case gender person de
gree
aspect ne
gation
accent. post-prep. accom. aggl. v
ocab
.
noun a1 a1 a2
depreciative noun a2 a1 a2
adjective a1 a1 a1 a1
ad-adjectival adjective
post-prepositional adjective
adverb a1
numeral a2 a1 a1 a1
pronoun (non-3rd person) a2 a1 a1 a2 a1
pronoun (3rd person) a1 a1 a1 a2 a1 a1
pronoun siebie a1
non-past verb a1 a1 a2
future by·c a1 a1 a2
agglut. by·c a1 a1 a2 a1
l-participle a1 a1 a2 a1
imperative a1 a1 a2
-no/-to a2
in nitive a2
adv. pres. prtcp. a2
adv. anter. prtcp. a2
gerund a1 a1 a2 a2 a1
adj. act. prtcp. a1 a1 a1 a2 a1
adj. pass. prtcp. a1 a1 a1 a2
a1
winien-like verb a1 a1 a2
predicative
preposition a2
conjunction
particle-adverb
alien (nominal) a1 a1 a2
alien (other)
case in plural (e.g., profesory vs. profesorowie).
These special forms do not  t in the scheme of
regular nominal in ection, and so were moved to
a separate  exeme for depreciative noun.
Ad-adjectival adjectives are special forms of
adjectives used in compounds like angielsko-
polski ‘English-Polish’. Moreover, some adjec-
tives (e.g., polski) have a special form that is re-
quired after some prepositions (e.g., po polsku ‘in
Polish’). This form constitutes post-prepositional
adjective  exeme.
A few verbs (e.g., powinien ‘should’) in ect in
an atypical way and lack some verbal  exemes
(e.g., imperative and l-participle). Winien-like
 exeme gathers present tense forms of these verbs
(which accept ‘ oating in ection’).
The class of predicatives consists of verbs
which do not in ect at all (e.g., warto ‘be worth’,
mo zna ‘can/may’, trzeba ‘must’).
3 Conclusions
Two tagsets can be compared and respective cor-
respondences between their grammatical classes
and categories can be found more easily when
the de nitions of those classes and categories are
stated explicitly and formulated in terms of eas-
ily veri able formal properties of particular word-
forms, such as their in ectional, morphosyntactic
and derivational characteristics, and their phono-
logical or orthographic makeup.
We presented a tagset for Polish constructed
with such criteria in mind. In particular, gram-
matical classes are understood as classes of  ex-
emes, i.e., they are de ned on the basis of,  rst
of all, in ectional and, secondly, morphosyntac-
tic properties of wordforms. Further distinctions,
such as those between non-in ecting forms of ver-
bal lexemes, are also made with the avoidance of
any recourse to the semantic or pragmatic prop-
erties of such forms. This allowed us to evade
the controversial issues of the exact extent of such
semantically-de ned traditional POSs as numeral
and pronoun.
Despite the evasion of semantic criteria, the re-
sulting set of grammatical classes bears surpris-
ing af nity to traditional POSs, with classes such
as noun and adjective corresponding directly to
traditional POSs, and other classes, such as non-
past verb, l-participle or gerund being proper
subclasses of such traditional POSs as verb. Be-
cause of this  ne-grainedness of the current tagset
we were able to evade the controversial issues of
whether to classify gerunds as nouns or as verbs,
and whether to classify adjectival participles as
adjectives or as verbs.
Acknowledgments
The tagset described here was highly in uenced
by many discussions with  ukasz D ebowski, by
the insightful comments we received from Zyg-
munt Saloni, and by the various remarks from El z-
bieta Hajnicz, Monika Korczakowska and Beata
Wierzcho owska. The research reported here was
partly supported by the KBN (State Committee for
Scienti c Research) grant 7 T11C 043 20.
References
Janusz S. Bie·n and Zygmunt Saloni. 1982. Poj e-
cie wyrazu morfologicznego i jego zastosowanie do
opisu  eksji polskiej (wersja wst epna). Prace Filo-
logiczne, XXXI:31 45.
Janusz S. Bie·n. 1991. Koncepcja s ownikowej infor-
macji morfologicznej i jej komputerowej wery kacji,
volume 383 of Rozprawy Uniwersytetu Warsza-
wskiego. Wydawnictwa Uniwersytetu Warsza-
wskiego, Warsaw.
 ukasz D ebowski. 2003. Recon gurable stochas-
tic tagger for languages with complex tag structure.
EACL 2003, Morphological Processing of Slavic
Languages.
Toma Erjavec, editor. 2001. Speci cations and Nota-
tion for MULTEXT-East Lexicon Encoding. Ljubl-
jana.
W odzimierz Gruszczy·nski and Zygmunt Saloni.
1978. Sk adnia grup liczebnikowych we wsp  czes-
nym j ezyku polskim. Studia Gramatyczne, II:17 
42.
Witold Ma·nczak. 1956. Ile jest rodzaj w w polskim?
J ezyk Polski, XXXVI(2):116 121.
Adam Przepi rkowski and Marcin Woli·nski. 2003.
The unbearable lightness of tagging: A case study
in morphosyntactic tagging of Polish. EACL 2003,
4th International Workshop on Linguistically Inter-
preted Corpora (LINC-03).
Adam Przepi rkowski, Anna Kup·s·c, Ma gorzata
Marciniak, and Agnieszka Mykowiecka. 2002. For-
malny opis j ezyka polskiego: Teoria i implemen-
tacja. Akademicka O cyna Wydawnicza EXIT,
Warsaw.
Jadwiga Puzynina. 1969. Nazwy czynno·sci we
wsp  czesnym j ezyku polskim. Wydawnictwo
Naukowe PWN, Warsaw.
Zygmunt Saloni. 1974. Klasy kacja gramatyczna lek-
sem w polskich. J ezyk Polski, LIV(1):3 13.
Zygmunt Saloni. 1976. Kategoria rodzaju we
wsp  czesnym j ezyku polskim. In Kategorie gra-
matyczne grup imiennych we wsp  czesnym j ezyku
polskim, pages 41 75. Ossolineum, Wroc aw.
Zygmunt Saloni. 1977. Kategorie gramatyczne liczeb-
nik w we wsp  czesnym j ezyku polskim. Studia
Gramatyczne, I:145 173.
Marcin Woli·nski and Adam Przepi rkowski. 2001.
Projekt anotacji morfosynktaktycznej korpusu
j ezyka polskiego. IPI PAN Research Report 938,
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of
Sciences.
Marcin Woli·nski. 2001. Rodzaj w w polszczy·znie jest
osiem. In W odzimierz Gruszczy·nski, Urszula An-
drejewicz, Miros aw Ba·nko, and Dorota Kopci·nska,
editors, Nie bez znaczenia... Prace o arowane
Profesorowi Zygmuntowi Saloniemu z okazji ju-
bileuszu 15000 dni pracy naukowej, pages 303 305.
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Bia ostockiego, Bia ys-
tok.

