1:15	SPONSOR: CLIF (Computational Linguistics in Flanders) INVITED SPEAKER: Steven Abney, University of Michigan PROGRAM COMMITTEE: Walter Daelemans, University of Antwerp and Tilburg University, co-chair Miles Osborne, University of Edinburgh, co-chair Thorsten Brants, Google Inc. Claire Cardie, Cornell University James Cussens, University of York Ido Dagan, Bar Ilan University Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh Yuji Matsumoto, Nara Institute of Science and Technology Rada Mihalcea, University of North Texas Raymond Mooney, University of Texas at Austin John Nerbonne, Groningen University Hwee-Tou Ng, National University of Singapore Grace Ngai, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University David Powers, Flinders University Adwait Ratnaparkhi, Microsoft Ellen Riloff, University of Utah Dan Roth, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Erik Tjong Kim Sang, University of Antwerp Antal van den Bosch, Tilburg University Additional Reviewers: Wen-Tau Yih, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Vivi Nastase, University of Ottawa Yuk Wah Wong, University of Texas at Austin Ruifang Ge, University of Texas at Austin Martin Reynaert, University of Tilburg Steve Clark, University of Edinburgh Razvan Bunescu, University of Texas at Austin Veronique Hoste, University of Antwerp Bart Decadt, University of Antwerp Anja Hothker, University of Antwerp Fien De Meulder, University of Antwerp SHARED TASK COORDINATORS: Erik Tjong Kim Sang, University of Antwerp Fien De Meulder, University of Antwerp CONFERENCE WEBSITE: http://cnts.uia.ac.be/conll2003/ PREFACE This volume contains the papers accepted for presentation at the 2003 conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL-2003), a SIGNLL meeting held in Edmonton, Canada, May 31 and June 1 in conjunction with the HLT-NAACL Conference.
2:15	CoNLL-2003 is the seventh in a series of meetings organized by SIGNLL1, the ACL special interest group on natural language learning.
3:15	The CoNLL meeting is intended to address all aspects of computational natural language learning.
4:15	This year, we have a special theme on semi-supervised learning; the development of techniques for making use of the massively available unannotated text data in order to increase accuracy of trained language processing systems.
5:15	Our keynote speaker, Steven Abney, fits this theme with a presentation about the Yarowsky algorithm.
6:15	As in the previous three editions of CoNLL, we have a shared task session, coordinated by Erik Tjong Kim Sang and Fien De Meulder.
7:15	This year the task is named-entity recognition.
8:15	For this session, training and test data were made available, and researchers were invited to apply their learning system to this task.
9:15	Seventeen systems have participated.
10:15	You will find descriptions of these systems and their results in these proceedings.
11:15	Of the 35 full papers submitted, the programme committee selected 17 papers, representative of the state of the art in computational language learning today.
12:15	We are very grateful to our program committee and additional reviewers for the effort they put in reviewing the papers.
13:15	We are also grateful to the HLT-NAACL-2003 conference organizers on whom we could rely for the local organization.
14:15	Finally, we most gratefully acknowledge the support of our sponsor, the Computational Linguistics in Flanders research community (CLIF) for sponsoring the invited speaker.
15:15	Walter Daelemans & Miles Osborne (editors) April 2003 1http://www.aclweb.org/signll/

