1:25	INVITED SPEAKER: Elliot Macklovitch, University of Montreal ORGANIZING COMMITTEE: Rada Mihalcea, University of North Texas Ted Pedersen, University of Minnesota, Duluth PROGRAM COMMITTEE: Lars Ahrenberg, Linkoping University Nicoletta Calzolari, University of Pisa Tim Chklovski, Massachusetts Institute of Technology Mona Diab, University of Maryland Ulrich Germann, USC Information Sciences Institute Daniel Gildea, University of Pennsylvania Maria das Gracas Volpe Nunes, University of Sao Paulo Nancy Ide, Vassar College Philippe Langlais, University of Montreal Lucia Helena Machado Rino, Federal University of Sao Carlos Eduard Hovy, USC Information Sciences Institute Elliot Macklovitch, University of Montreal Daniel Marcu, USC Information Sciences Institute Dan Melamed, New York University Magnus Merkel, Linkoping University Ruslan Mitkov, University of Wolverhampton Hermann Ney, RWTH Aachen Grace Ngai, Hong Kong Polytechnic University Franz Och, USC Information Sciences Institute Kemal Oflazer, Sabanci University Kishore Papineni, IBM Jessie Pinkham, Microsoft Research Andrei Popescu-Belis, ISSCO/TIM/ETI University of Geneva Florence Reeder, MITRE Philip Resnik, University of Maryland Antonio Ribeiro, European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Italy Michel Simard, University of Montreal Harold Somers, University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology Arturo Trujillo, Canon Research Centre Europe Dan Tufis, RACAI, Romania Jean Veronis, University of Provence Clare Voss, Army Research Lab Yorick Wilks, University of Sheffield WORKSHOP WEBSITE: http://www.cs.unt.edu/rada/wpt/ INTRODUCTION This volume contains papers accepted for presentation at the Workshop on Building and Using Parallel Texts: Data Driven Machine Translation and Beyond.
2:25	This event took place on May 31, 2003, in Edmonton, Canada, immediately following the HLT-NAACL Human Language Technology Conference.
3:25	The workshop was centered around the problem of building and using parallel corpora, which are vital resources for efficiently deriving multi-lingual text processing tools.
4:25	We issued calls for both regular and short, latebreaking papers.
5:25	After careful review by our program committee, nine regular papers and three short papers were accepted for presentation.
6:25	We were truly impressed by the high quality of the reviews provided by all the members of the program committee, particularly since deadlines were very tight.
7:25	All of the committee members provided timely and thoughtful reviews, and the papers that appear have certainly benefited from that expert feedback.
8:25	Before the workshop, we conducted a comparative evaluation of word alignment techniques that was open to anyone with a word alignment system and a bit of courage.
9:25	EnglishFrench and RomanianEnglish parallel text was made available to participants, and they had about two weeks to develop or train their systems on this data.
10:25	Then previously held out test data was released, and participants had one week to submit word aligned versions of the test data to us for scoring.
11:25	Seven teams participated in the shared task, and each has a fully reviewed short paper in the proceedings describing their system.
12:25	In addition, there are two papers that present overall evaluations of the exercise.
13:25	The shared task on word alignment would not have been possible without parallel text, and there are quite a few people who deserve thanks for creating data that was a part of this task.
14:25	The EnglishFrench parallel text came to us from Franz Och, Herman Ney, and Ulrich German.
15:25	Franz and Herman kindly provided their word aligned EnglishFrench corpus, which served as our gold standard in the EnglishFrench evaluation.
16:25	The training data consisted of Ulrich Germanns freely available Aligned Hansards of the 36th Parliament of Canada (Release 2001-1a).
17:25	The RomanianEnglish gold standard data was created by a number of student volunteers from the Department of English, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
18:25	The training data includes the freely available MULTEXT-East RomanianEnglish version of George Orwells novel 1984, as well as the Romanian Constitution and newspaper articles collected from the Internet.
19:25	Even with all that data, there would not have been a shared a task without participants.
20:25	We give our deepest thanks to the shared task participants, who took a leap of faith in allowing their systems to be part of a comparative evaluation.
21:25	Finally, when we first started planning this workshop, we agreed that having a high quality invited speaker was crucial.
22:25	We nearly immediately realized that there would be no better choice than Elliot Macklovitch, who has a wealth of experience working with parallel text.
23:25	We were pleasantly surprised when Elliot quickly and enthusiastically agreed to deliver the invited talk.
24:25	We thank him not only for his talk, but also for the boost of confidence his quick acceptance of our invitation provided.
25:25	Ted Pedersen Rada Mihalcea April 2003

