Grounding spatial named entities for information extraction and question answering Jochen L.
Leidner Gail Sinclair Bonnie Webber School of Informatics University of Edinburgh 2 Buccleuch Place Edinburgh EH8 9LW Scotland, UK jochen.leidner@ed.ac.uk, csincla1@inf.ed.ac.uk, bonnie@inf.ed.ac.uk Abstract The task of named entity annotation of unseen text has recently been successfully automated with near-human performance.
But the full task involves more than annotation, i.e. identifying the scope of each (continuous) text span and its class (such as place name).
It also involves grounding the named entity (i.e.
establishing its denotation with respect to the world or a model).
The latter aspect has so far been neglected.
In this paper, we show how geo-spatial named entities can be grounded using geographic coordinates, and how the results can be visualized using off-the-shelf software.
We use this to compare a textual surrogate of a newspaper story, with a visual surrogate based on geographic coordinates.
1 Introduction
The task of named entity annotation of unseen text has recently been successfully automated, achieving near-human performance using machine learning (Zheng and Su, 2002).
But many applications also require grounding i.e., associating each classi ed text span with a referent in the world or some model thereof.
The current paper discusses spatial grounding of named entities that may be referentially ambiguous, using a minimality heuristic that is informed by external geographic knowledge sources.
We then apply these ideas to the creation of visual surrogates for news articles.
This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses how spatial named entities can be grounded and how this interacts with their extraction and applications.
Section 3 describes a geo-spatial resolution algorithm.
Section 4 shows how maps can be automatically constructed from named-entity tagged newswire text using resolved place names, hence introducing a new, graphical document surrogate.
Section 5 deals with the usefulness of grounded named entities for question answering.
Section 6 presents some related work, and Section 7 concludes this paper.
2 Spatial
Grounding Gazetteers are large lists of names of geographic entities, usually enriched with further information, such as their class (e.g., town, river, dam, etc.), their size, and their location (i.e.
with respect to some relative or absolute coordinate system such as longitude and latitude).
Appendix A identi es some publicly available sources.
UN-LOCODE is the of cial gazetteer by the United Nations; it is also freely available from the UNECE Web site1 and contains more than 36 000 locations in 234 countries (UNECE, 1998).
The Alexandria Gazetteer (Smith et al., 1996; Frew et al., 1998) is another database of geographical entities, including both their coordinates and relationships such as: in-state-of, in-province-of, in-county-of, in-country-of, in-region-of, part-of and formerly-known-as.
To date, Named Entity Recognition (NER) has only used gazetteers as evidence that a text span could be some kind of place name (LOCATION), even though their nite nature makes lists of names of limited use for classi cation (Mikheev et al., 1999).
Here we use them for spatial grounding relating linguistic entities of subtype LOCATION (Grishman and Sundheim, 1998) to their real-world counterparts.
World Atlases and the gazetteers that index them are not the only resources than can be used for grounding spatial terms.
In biomedicine, there are are several brain atlases of different species, using various different techniques, and focussing on both normal and disease state; as well as a digital atlas of the human body 1 http://www.unece.org/cefact/locode/service/main.htm Figure 1: Grounding an XML Ontology in Voxels: The Mouse Atlas (Baldock et al., 1999).
based on data from the Visible Human project.
Such atlases and the nomenclatures that label their parts, provide an important resource for biomedical research and clinical diagnosis.
For example, the Mouse Atlas (Ringwald et al., 1994) comprises a sequence of 3D (volumetric) reconstructions of the mouse embryo in each of its 26 Theiler States of development.
Indexing it is an part-of hierarchy of anatomical terms (such as embryo.organsystem.cardiovascularsystem-.heart.atrium), called the Mouse Anatomical Nomenclature (MAN).
Each term is mapped to one or more sets of adjacent voxels2 that constitute the term’s denotation in the embryo.
Figure 1 illustrate this linkage (using 2D cross-sections) in the EMAGE database.3 Just as one might nd it useful for information extraction or question answering to ground grographic terms found in previously unseen text, one may also nd it useful to ground anatomical terms in previously unseen text.
One example of this would be in providing support for the curation of the Gene Expression Database (GXD).4 This support could come in the form of a named entity recognizer for anatomical parts in text, with grounding against the Mouse Atlas, using the gazetteer-like information in the MAN.
So what is the relationship between a place name gazetteer like UN-LOCODE and the Mouse Atlas?
The MAN is structured in a similar part-of hierarchy to that of geographical locations: USA embryo California organ system San Mateo County cardiovascular system Redwood City heart Because both gazetteers like UN-LOCODE and biomedical atlases like the Mouse Atlas provide spatial grounding for linguistic terms (Figure 2), both can be used to reason about spatio-temporal settings of a discourse, for instance, to resolve referential ambiguity.
2 Pixels
are points in the 2D plane a0 x, y a1 ; voxels are 3D generalizations of pixels a0 xa2 ya2 za1 . 3 http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Emage/database/intro.html 4 http://genex.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Resources/GXDQuery1/ 3 Place-Name Resolution for Information Extraction There are many places that share the same (Berlin, Germany a3 Berlin, WI, USA) or similar names (York, UK a3 New York, USA), usually because historically, the founders of a new town had given it a similar or the same name as the place they emigrated from.
When ambiguous place names are used in conversation or in text, it is usually clear to the hearer what speci c referent is intended.
First, speaker and hearer usually share some extra-linguistic context and implicitly adhere to Grice’s Cooperative Principle and the maxims that follow, which require a speaker to provide more identifying information about a location that the recipient is believed to be unfamiliar with.
Secondly, linguistic context can provide clues: an accident report on the road between Perth and Dundee promotes an interpretation of Perth in Scotland, while an accident on the road between Perth and Freemantle promotes an interpretation of Perth in Western Australia.
Computers, which are bound to select referents algorithmically, can exploit linguistic context more easily than extra-linguistic context, but even the use of linguistic context requires (as always) some subtle heuristic reasoning.
Grounding place names mentioned in a text can support effective visualization for instance, in a multimedia document surrogate that contains textual, video and map elements (e.g.
in a question answering scenario), where we want to ensure that the video shows the region and the map is centered around the places mentioned.
To make use of linguistic context in resolving ambiguous place names, we apply two different minimality heuristics (Gardent and Webber, 2001).
The rst we borrow (slightly modi ed) from work in automatic word sense disambiguation (Gale et al., 1992), calling it one referent per discourse . It assumes that a place name mentioned in a discourse refers to the same location throughout the discourse, just as a word is assumed to be used in the same one sense throughout the discourse.
Neither is logically necessary, and hence both are simply interpretational biases.
The second minimality heuristic assumes that, in cases where there is more than one place name mentioned in some span of text, the smallest region that is able to ground the whole set is the one that gives them their interpretation.5 This can be used to resolve referential ambiguity by proximity: i.e., not only is the place name Berlin taken to denote the same Berlin throughout a discourse unless mentioned otherwise,6 but so does a Potsdam men5 Probably the smaller the span, the more often valid will this heuristic be.
6 This
paper is a rare exception due to its meta-linguistic nature.
Gazetteer Named Entity Grounding Real World UN-LOCODE Novosibirsk a4 55 02a5 N; 82 55a5 Ea6 (Novosibirsk) (longitude/latitude) Mouse Atlas atrium a7a8a4 345, 2, 345a6 ; a9a10a9a11a9a13a12 (part of the heart) (set of voxels) Figure 2: Comparison between Spatial Grounding in UN-LOCODE and the Mouse Atlas.
A’ A’’ C D E F GHI J K B Places mentioned in discourse Potential Referents Places NOT mentioned in discourse Figure 3: A Place-Name Resolution Method.
tioned together with a Berlin uniquely select the capital of Germany as the likely referent from the set of all candidate Berlins.7 To illustrate this spatial minimality heuristic, consider Figure 3: Assume that a mention of place A in a text could either refer to Aa5 or Aa5 a5 . If the text also contains terms that ground unambiguously to I, J, and K, we assume the referent of A is Aa5 rather than Aa5 a5 because the former leads to a smaller spatial context.
To use this spatial minimality heuristic, we start by extracting all place names using a named entity recognizer.
We then look up the confusion set of potential referents for each place name, e.g. for Berlin: a7 Berlin, FRG (German capital); Berlin, WI, USA; Berlin, NJ, USA; Berlin, CT, USA; Berlin, NH, USA; Berlin, GA, USA; Berlin, IL, USA; Berlin, NY, USA; Berlin, ND, USA; Berlin, NJ, USA a12 . Each member of the set of potential referents is associated with its spatial coordinates (longitude/latitude), using a gazetteer.
We then compute the cross-product of all the confusion sets.
(Each member of the cross-product contains one potential referent for each place name, along with its spatial coordinates.) For each member of the cross-product, we compute the area of the minimal polygon bounding all the potential referents, and select as the intended interpretation, the one with the smallest area.8 The resulting behaviour is 7 despite the fact that most places named Berlin are in the United States 8 One can approximate this, either by computing the sum of a14 Berlin; Potsdam a15a17a16a18 Berlin, FRG (Germany) a14 Fairburn; Berlin a15a17a16a18 Berlin, WI, USA a14 West Berlin; Bishops; Dicktown a15a17a16a18 Berlin, NJ, USA a14 Kensington; Berlin; New Britain a15a17a16a18 Berlin, CT, USA a14 Copperville; Berlin; Gorham a15a19a16a18 Berlin, NH, USA a14 Moultrie; Berlin a15a19a16a18 Berlin, GA, USA a14 Berlin; Prouty a15a17a16a18 Berlin, IL, USA a14 Berlin; Berlin Center; Cherryplain a15a17a16a18 Berlin, NY, USA a14 Medberry; Berlin a15a19a16a18 Berlin, ND, USA Figure 4: Spatial Reference Resolution Using Spatial Minimality.
shown in Figure 4: depending on contextually mentioned other places, a different Berlin is selected.
The value of this heuristic needs to be assessed quantitatively against various types of text.
In resolving anatomical designators in text, we may employ a variation of the spatial minimality heuristic, based on the fact that no listing will ever be complete with respect to all the existing or new-minted synonyms for anatomical terms.
When grounding the anatomical terms in the text In subsequent stages until birth, cytokeratin 8 continues to be expressed in embryonic taste buds distributed in punctuate patterns at regular intervals along rows that are symmetrically located on both sides of the median sulcus in the dorsal anterior developing tongue.
we nd no median sulcus within the MAN, only alveolar sulcus, optic sulcus, pre-otic sulcus, sulcus limitans and sulcus terminalis.
We just assume that all anatomical terms refer to previously recognized anatomical entities, just as we assume that all geographic terms refer to existing geographic entities and not, for example, some new town called Berlin or London that is not yet in the gazetteer.
Hence median sulcus is assumed to be a synonym for one of the ve sulci given in the MAN.
At this point, we can invoke the spatial minimality heuristic, looking for the minimal bounding space that includes tongue and one of the ve sulci, here yielding sulcus terminalis . Thus the spatial minimality heuristic is here pairwise point-point distances, or symbolically, using a hierarchical gazetteer’s relations, such as in-region-of.
used with other assumptions to resolve missing or previously unseen terms.
4 Visualization
of Geo-Spatial Aspects in Narrative The usefulness of visual representations to convey information is widely recognized (cf.
(Larkin and Simon, 1987)).
Here, we use the grounding of named entities in news stories to create a visual surrogate that represents their spatial aboutness . Two news stories were selected from online newspapers on the same day (2003-02-21): one story (Appendix B) reports the tragic death of a baby from London in a Glasgow hospital despite ying it to a Glasgow specialist hospital in the Royal aircraft (BBC News, 2003), and the other report (Appendix C) describes the search of the Californian police for a pregnant women from Modesto, CA, who has disappeared (The Mercury News, 2003).
We use the term surrogate to refer to a partial view of a text (e.g.
(Leidner, 2002)).
Figure 5 shows a textual surrogate in the form of all place names found in a text: an analyst who wants to get a quick overview about the locations involved in some item of news reportage, to decide its local interest or relevance, might nd such a surrogate helpful, although the source would still have to be skim-read.
Story A ...
Scotland ...
Tooting ...
London ...
Glasgow ...
London ...
Glasgow ...
Northolt ...
Glasgow ...
Britain ...
Prestwick ...
Tooting ...
Glasgow ...
UK ...
(Glasgow) ...
Story B Modesto ...
(Southern California) ...
(Modesto) ...
Los Angeles ...
Sacramento ...
Berkeley (Marina) ...
Fresno ...
Oakland ...
Modesto ...
Los Angeles ...
Southern California ...
Modesto ...
Southern California ...
New York ...
Long Island ...
Figure 5: A Textual Geo-Spatial Document Surrogate for the Stories in Appendices B and C.
We now compare this baseline textual surrogate to a graphical map representation that draws on the algorithm introduced before.
Our simple visualisation method comprises the following components (Figure 6): an (opendomain) news item is fed into locotagger, our simple named entity tagger for place names based on UNLOCODE.9 It recognises location names, resolves multireferential place names and looks up the coordinates: 9 For the experiment reported here, we also used data from http://www.astro.com/cgi/aq.cgi?lang=e.
Named Entity Tagging Generator Map Newswire Text Graphical Map Longitute/ LookupLatitude Placename Resolution Figure 6: System Architecture.
Scott, more than a dozen news crews from <ENAMEX type="LOCATION" longitude= "-118.25" latitude="34.05">Los Angeles</ENAMEX> to <ENAMEX type= "LOCATION" longitude="121.5" latitude="38.583333">Sacramento </ENAMEX> camped out front.
From the text we obtain a vector of types of all spatial named entities with their frequency of occurrence in the text: a20a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a22 UK : 1 Scotland : 1 Tooting : 2 London : 2 Glasgow : 5 Northolt : 2 Prestwick : 1 Britain : 1 a23a25a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a26 a20a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a21 a22 Modesto : 3 SouthernCali f ornia : 2 LosAngeles : 2 Sacramento : 1 Berkeley : 1 Fresno : 1 Oakland : 1 NewYork : 1 LongIsland : 1 a23a25a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a24 a26 For simplicity, we drop those that correspond to regions (which are represented by sets of points) and feed the remaining list of point coordinates (corresonding to villages and cities) into a map generator to generate a Mercator projection of the geographical area that includes all the points plus 10% of the surrounding area.
For this, The Generic Map Tools (GMT)10 were used, in this case via HTTP.11 Figure 7 shows the resulting map for the story in Appendix B12 Figure 9 shows the map for the story in Appendix C.
Clearly, such a visual surrogate is superior with respect to comprehension time than the textual surrogate presented before.
It is interesting so see what happens if we leave out the nal paragraph for the map creation (Figure 8): we obtain a zoomed-in version of the map.
This turns out to be the case for many stories and is due to the convention of news reportage to close a report with linking the narrative to similar events in order to present the event in a wider context.
10 http://gmt.soest.hawaii.edu/ 11 http://stellwagen.er.usgs.gov/mapit/ 12 Place names that are too small to be contained in the gazetteer (Tooting/Northold) are ignored.
-5˚ -5˚ -4˚ -4˚ -3˚ -3˚ -2˚ -2˚ -1˚ -1˚ 0˚ 0˚ 52˚ 52˚ 53˚ 53˚ 54˚ 54˚ 55˚ 55˚ 56˚ 56˚ Figure 7: Automatic Visualization of Story B: A Baby Flown from London to Glasgow for Medical Treatment Dies there.
-122˚ -122˚ -121˚ -121˚ -120˚ -120˚ -119˚ -119˚ -118˚ -118˚ 34˚ 34˚ 35˚ 35˚ 36˚ 36˚ 37˚ 37˚ 38˚ 38˚ 39˚ 39˚ Figure 8: Automatic Visualization of Story C: A Pregnant Woman is Missing in Modeno, CA (Local View; Final Paragraph Excluded).
-120˚ -120˚ -105˚ -105˚ -90˚ -90˚ -75˚ -75˚ Figure 9: Story C: The Final Paragraph Places the Event in Context (Global View; Complete Story).
(Shanon, 1979) discusses how the granularity of the answers to where-questions depends on the reference points of speaker and listener (Where is the Empire State Building?
(a) In New York, (b) In the U.S.A, (c) On 34th Street and 3rd Avenue); the map generation task depends on such levels of granularity in the sense that to create a useful map, entities that belong to the same level of granularity or scale should be marked (e.g.
city city rather than village continent).
5 Question
Answering Using grounding knowledge in gazetteers also enables us to answer questions in natural language more effectively: 1.
What is X?
Q: What is Kangiqsualujjuaq?
A: Kangiqsualujjuaq is a place approximately 1500 kilometers north of Montreal, Canada.
(For some place names, many humans cannot tell they refer to places.) 2.
Where is X?
Q: Where is Cannes located?
A: [should yield a surrogate based on textual descriptions generated from the gazetteer relations: X is-typeY, X part-ofZ and the coordinates, plus a map as generated above, with additional images, e.g. from satellites or picture search engines as available.] 3.
What X is Y part of?
Q: What is ‘Bad Bergzabern’ part of?
A: Bad Bergzabern is part of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Q: Is Andorra la Vella part of Spain?
A: No, Andorra la Vella belongs to Andorra.
4. How far is X from Y?
Q: How far is Cambridge from London?
A: The distance between London, England, United Kingdom and Cambridge, England, United Kingdom is 79 km (49 miles or 43 nautical miles).
Note here that the spatial minimality heuristic resolves Cambridge and London to places in the UK rather than, say, London, Ontario, Canada and Cambridge, Mass., USA.
However the answer makes clear the precise question being adressed, so the user can follup up with a different question if this was not what he or she intended.
Since sophisticated gazetteers are available, answering such questions should not be based on textual extraction from Internet sources, but be based on the gazetteers directly, which reduces noise.
6 Related
Work Whereas a lot of work has been done in the area of spatial databases (Shekhar et al., 1999; Freytag et al., 2000; Paredaens, 1995; Paredaens and Kuijpers, 1998), little attention seems to have been given so far to the problem of generating maps from text or annotating maps with information elicited from unstructured documents.
The work presented here perhaps most closely resembles that of (Mackinlay, 1986; Casner, 1990; Roth and He ey, 1993) who describe systems that generate multimedial representations, potentially including maps, but from a formalized knowledge source rather than unstructured text, and (Waldinger et al., 2002), who describe Geo-Logica, a system that can transform requests to see a place (formulated in natural language) into a three-dimensional aerial view.
7 Summary
and Conclusion Rich gazetteers can be helpful in determining unique geospatial referents and have many applications.
Starting with a description of how spatial named entities can be grounded in the physical world using gazetteer knowledge in two different domains, we have described a heuristic method to resolve place names using such gazetteers.
We have then applied our method to the task of drawing maps from text automatically.
These (geo-)graphical document surrogates give an overview about where a reported news event takes place.
We do not know of previous attempts to create geographical maps automatically from unconstrained newswire text.
Many venues for further research can be conceived, for instance, a ner granularity of analysis could reveal more named entity classes (including e.g. brigdges and other artifacts) and their relative ortientation.
Maps as created here could also be used to produce an animation from multiple documents (with different time-stamps) on the same topic to illustrate how the importance of places shifts over time, which could aid analysts in their timely identi cation of regions of crisis.
Acknowledgments. The authors are grateful to the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) for creating UN-LOCODE, to Johanna Moore, Michael Piotrowski, IBM UK, The National e-Science Centre, Edinburgh, Richard Baldock (MRC Genetics Unit) and the Edwina Gazetteer Project for discussions and support.
The three anonymous reviewers helped to improve the quality of this paper.
We would also like to acknowledge the nancial support for the rst author of the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) under grant D/02/01831, of Linguit GmbH (research contract UK-2002/2), and the School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh.
References Richard A.
Baldock, Chrisophe Dubreuil, Bill Hill, and Duncan Davidson.
1999. The Edinburgh Mouse Atlas: Basic structure and informatics.
In S.
Levotsky, editor, Bioinformatics Databases and Systems, pages 102 115.
Kluwer Academic Press.
BBC News.
2003. Royal Mercy Flight Baby Dies.
Online (Accessed Friday 2003-02-21).
S. M.
Casner. 1990.
A Task-Analytic Approach to the Automated Design of Information Graphics.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pittsburgh.
J. Frew, M.
Freeston, N.
Freitas, L.
L. Hill, G.
Janee, K.
Lovette, R.
Nideffer, T.
R. Smith, and Q.
Zheng. 1998.
The Alexandria Digital Library architecture.
In Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries: Second European Conference (ECDL’98), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol.
1513, pages 19 23.
Johann C.
Freytag, M.
Flasza, and Michael Stillger.
2000. Implementing geospatial operations in an object-relational database system.
In Statistical and Scienti c Database Management, pages 209 219.
W. Gale, K.
Church, and D.
Yarowsky. 1992.
One sense per discourse.
In Proceedings of the Fourth DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 233 237.
Claire Gardent and Bonnie Webber.
2001. Towards the use of automated reasoning in discourse disambiguation.
Journal of Logic Language and Information, 10:487 509.
R. Grishman and B.
Sundheim, editors.
1998. Proceedings of the Sixth Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7).
Morgan Kaufmann.
J. Larkin and H.
Simon. 1987.
Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth ten thousand words.
Cognitive Science, 11:65 99.
Jochen L.
Leidner. 2002.
Discovery of Artefacts in Scienti c Prose Using Machine Learning.
M.Phil. dissertation, University of Cambridge.
Jock D.
Mackinlay. 1986.
Automating the design of graphical presentations of relational information.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, 5:110 141.
Andrei Mikheev, Marc Moens, and Claire Grover.
1999. Named entity recognition without gazetteers.
In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL’99), Bergen, Norway.
Jan Paredaens and Bart Kuijpers.
1998. Data models and query languages for spatial databases.
Data Knowledge Engineering, 25(1-2):29 53.
Jan Paredaens.
1995. Spatial databases, the nal frontier.
In G.
Gottlob and M.
Y. Vardi, editors, Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Database Theory (ICDT), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 893, pages 14 32.
Springer-Verlag. M.
Ringwald, R.
A. Baldock, J.
Bard, M.
H. Kaufman, J.
T. Eppig, J.
E. Richardson, J.
H. Nadeau, and Davidson D.
1994. A database for mouse development.
Science, 265:2033 2034.
S. Roth and W.
He ey.
1993. Intelligent multimedia presentation systems: Research and principles.
In Mark Maybury, editor, Intelligent Multimedia Interfaces, pages 13 58.
AAAI Press.
Benny Shanon.
1979. Where questions.
In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shashi Shekhar, Sanjay Chawla, Siva Ravada, Andrew Fetterer, Xuan Liu, and Chang tien Lu.
1999. Spatial databases Accomplishments and research needs.
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 11(1):45 55.
T. Smith, D.
Andresen, L.
Carver, R.
Dolin, C.
Fischer, J.
Frew, M.
Goodchild, O.
Ibarra, R.
Kemp, R.
Kothuri, M.
Larsgaard, B.
Manjunath, D.
Nebert, J.
Simpson, A.
Wells, T.
Yang, and Q.
Zheng. 1996.
A digital library for geographically referenced materials.
IEEE Computer, 29:54 60.
The Mercury News.
2003. News Crews Wait and Watch as Police Search Home of Missing Woman.
Online (Accessed Friday 2003-02-21).
UNECE. 1998.
LOCODE Code for Trade and Transport Locations.
Technical Report and UNECE Recommendation 16, United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
R. Waldinger, M.
Reddy, C.
Culy, J.
Hobbs, and J.
Dungan.
2002. Deductive response to geographic queries.
In GIScience 2002, Boulder, CO.
GuoDong Zheng and Jian Su.
2002. Named entity tagging using an HMM-based chunk tagger.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 209 219, Philadelphia .

