Building a New Internet Chat System for Sharing Timing Information  
Kanayo Ogura 
 
School of 
knowledge Science, 
Japan Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology 
 
1-1 Asahidai,Tatsunokuchi, 
Nomi, Ishikawa, 
923-1292, Japan 
 
k-ogura@jaist.ac.jp 
Takeshi Masuda 
 
NEC Informatec Systems, 
Ltd. 
 
2561,Shinohara, 
Kohoku, Yokohama, 
 Kanagawa, 
222-0026, Japan 
 
t-masuda@ 
qg.jp.nec.com 
Masato Ishizaki 
 
Institute Socio-Information 
and Communication Studies, 
The Univ. of Tokyo 
 
 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, 
Tokyo,  
113-0033, Japan 
 
ishizaki@isics.u-
tokyo.ac.jp 
Abstract 
Chat system has gained popularity as a 
tool for real-time conversation. How-
ever, standard chat systems have prob-
lems due to lack of timing information. 
To tackle this problem, we have built a 
system which has the following func-
tions: 1) function of making typing state 
visible; 2) floor holding function at the 
start of typing. The evaluation results 
show that the sys-tem with each new 
function significantly increases the 
number of turns, which indicates the ef-
fectiveness of the new functions for 
smooth communication. The survey re-
sults showed that the system with the 
function of making typing state visible 
significantly different from that without 
them concerning 1) easiness of adjust-
ing the timing of utterances and 
smoothness of conversations, and 2) 
easiness of using the system. 
1 Introduction

2 
2.1 
Use of computer communication tools is now 
indispensable to our everyday life because of the 
proliferation of computer network. These com-
munication tools include E-mail, BBS (Bulletin 
Board System) and chat systems. Among all, 
chat system users have been increasing dramati-
cally for its real  time nature. Despite of its popu-
larity, standard chat systems do not allow users 
to share timing information, which is thought to 
be necessary for smooth communication. This 
often makes chat conversations confusing such 
as ones with a lot of repetitions and corrections. 
To tackle the problem of lack of timing in-
formation, we have implemented a system which 
has the following functions: 1) function of mak-
ing typing state visible; 2) floor holding function 
at the start of typing.  
To evaluate the effectiveness of the system, 
the length of utterance and the number of utter-
ances are used as quantitative index for smooth 
communication. We also conducted question-
naire surveys of users' evaluation of the system 
from effective-ness of the new functions to easi-
ness of using the system. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section two explains the problems of standard 
chat systems and related studies to tackle them. 
Section three describes our implemented new 
system with explanatory examples. Section four 
shows the effectiveness of our new system by 
quantitative evaluation results. Section five con-
cludes with some final remarks and our further 
attempt to improve the system. 
 
Previous Work 
Problems of standard chat systems 
In chat conversations, even if no message ap-
pears on the screen, this does not mean other us-
ers are typing a message. Other users might be 
reading or waiting for the others' message or be 
leaving the computer. This is due to the mecha-

