References Anne Abeille, ed.
2003. Building and using syntactically annotated corpora.
Kluwer. Franz Beil and Gelnn Carroll and Detlef Prescher and Stefan Riezler and Mats Rooth.
1999. Inside-outside estimation of a lexicalised PCFG for German.
ACL. Thorsten Brants and Wojciech Skut and Hans Uszkoreit.
1999. Syntactic annotation of a German newspaper corpus.
Proc. of ATALA treebank workshop.
Sabine Brants and Stefanie Dipper and Peter Eisenberg and Silvia Hansen-Schirra and Esther Konig and Wolfgang Lezius and Christian Rohrer and George Smith and Hans Uszkoreit.
in press.
TIGER: Linguistic interpretation of a german corpus.
Journal of Language and Computation.
John Carroll and Guido Minnen and Ted Briscoe.
1999. Corpus annotation for parser evaluation.
EACL workshop on Linguistically interpreted corpora (LINC).
John Carroll and Guido Minnen and Edward Briscoe.
2003. Parser evaluation: using a grammatical relation annotation scheme.
In Abeille, ed., Building and using syntactically annotated corpora.
Kluwer. Ann Copestake and Alex Lescarides and Dan Flickinger.
2001. An algebra for semantic construction in constraint-based grammars.
ACL. Stefanie Dipper.
2003. Implementing and documenting large-scale grammars germaan LFG.
PhD thesis, Univ.
of Stuttgart.
Martin Forst.
2003. Treebank conversion creating a german f-structure bank from the TIGER corpus.
Proc. of the LFG '03 conference.
Martin Forst.
2003. Treebank conversion establishing a testsuite for a broad-coverage LFG from the TIGER treebank.
EACL workshop no linguistically interpreted corpora (LINC).
Anette Frank.
2002. Treebank conversion.
Converting the NEGRA treebank to an LTAG grammar.
Proc. of workshop on multi-layer corpus-based analysis.
Tracy Holloway King and Richard Crouch and Stefan Riezler and Mary Dalrymple and Ron M.
Kaplan. 2003.
The PARC 700 dependency bank.
EACL workshop on linguistically interpreted corpora (LINC).
John T.
Maxwell III and Ronald M.
Kaplan. 1993.
The interface between phrasal and functional constraints.
Computational Linguistics.
Stephan Oepen and John Carroll.
2000. Parser engineering and performance profiling.
Natural Language Engineering.
Stephen Oepen and Kristina Toutanova and Stuart Shieber and Chris Manning and Dan Flickinger and Thorsten Brants.
2002. The LinGO redwoods treebank.
Motivation and preliminary applications.
COLING. Stefan Riezler and Tracy Holloway King and Ronald M.
Kaplan and Richard Crouch and John T.
Maxwell III and Mark Johnson.
2002. Parsnig the Wall Street Journal using a lexical-functional grammar and discriminative estimation techniques.
ACL. Wojciech Skut and Thorsten Brants and Brigitee Krenn and Hans Uszkoreit.
1998. A linguistically interpreted corpus of german newspaper text.
LREC. Heike Telljohann and Erhard Hinrichs and Sandra Kubler.
2003. Stylebook for the tubingen treebank of written german.
Tech report, Univ.
of Tubingen.
Wolfgang Wahlster, ed.
2000. Verbmobil: foundations of speech-to-speech translation. Springer.

