Introduction to Frontiers in Corpus Annotation Adam Meyers New York University meyers@cs.nyu.edu A new annotated corpus can have a pivotal role in the future of computational linguistics.
Corpus annotation can de ne new NLP tasks and set new standards.
This may put many of the papers presented at this workshop on the cutting edge of our eld.
A standard, however, is a double edged sword.
A standard corpus urges users to accept the theory of how to represent things that underlie that corpus.
For example, a Penn Treebank theory of grammar is implicit in PennTreebank-based parsers.
This can be a problem if one rejects some aspects of that theory.
Also one may object to a particular system of annotation because some theories generalize to cover new ground (e.g., new languages) better than others.
Nevertheless, advantages of accepting a corpus as standard include the following: a0 It is straight-forward to compare the performance of the set of systems that produce the same form of output, e.g., Penn Treebank-based parsers can be compared in terms of how well they reproduce the Penn Treebank.
a0 Alternative systems based on a standard are largely interchangeable.
Thus a system that uses one PennTreebank-based parser as a component can easily be adapted to use another better performing PennTreebank-based parser.
a0 Standards can be built on.
For example, if one accepts the framework of the Penn Treebank, it is easy to move on to representations of deeper structure as suggested in three papers in this volume (Miltsakaki et al., 2004; Babko-Malaya et al., 2004; Meyers et al., 2004).
It is my view that these advantages outweigh the disadvantages.
I propose that the papers in this volume be viewed with the following question in mind: How can the work covered by this collection of papers be integrated together?
Put differently, to what extent are these resources mergeable?
The rst six papers describe linguistic annotation in four languages: Spanish (Alc·antara and Moreno, 2004), English (Miltsakaki et al., 2004; Babko-Malaya et al., 2004; Meyers et al., 2004), Czech (Sgall et al., 2004) and German(Baumann et al., 2004).
The sixth, seventh and eighth papers (Baumann et al., 2004; C‚ mejrek et al., 2004; Helmreich et al., 2004) explore questions of multilingual annotation of syntax and semantics, beginning to answer the question of how annotation systems can be made compatible across languages.
Indeed (Helmreich et al., 2004) explores the question of integration across languages, as well as levels of annotation.
(Baumann et al., 2004) also describes how a number of different linguistic levels can be related in annotation (pragmatic and prosodic) among two languages (English and German).
The ninth and tenth papers (Langone et al., 2004; Zabokrtsk·y and Lopatkov·a, 2004) are respectively about a corpus related to a lexicon and the reverse: a lexicon related to a corpus.
This opens up the wider theme of the intergration of a number of different linguistic resources.
As the natural language community produces more and more linguistic resources, especially corpora, it seems important to step back and look at the larger picture.
If these resources can be t together as part of a larger puzzle, this could produce a sketch of the future of our eld.
References M.
Alc·antara and A.
Moreno. 2004.
Syntax to Semantics Transformation: Application to Treebanking.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
O. Babko-Malaya, M.
Palmer, N.
Xue, A.
Joshi, and S.
Kulick. 2004.
Proposition Bank II: Delving Deeper.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
S. Baumann, C.
Brinkmann, S.
Hansen-Schirra, G.
Kruijff, I.
Kruijff-Korbayov·a, S.
Neumann, and E.
Teich. 2004.
Multi-dimensional annotation of linguistic corpora for investigating information structure.
In HLTNAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
M. C‚ mejrek, J.
Cu r·in, and J.
Havelka. 2004.
Prague Czech-English Dependency Treebank: Any Hopes for a Common Annotation Scheme?
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
S. Helmreich, D.
Farwell, B.
Dorr, N.
Habash, L.
Levin, T.
Mitamura, F.
Reeder, K.
Miller, E.
Hovy, O.
Rambow, and A.Siddharthan. 2004.
Interlingual annotation of multilingual text corpora.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
H. Langone, B.
R. Haskell, and G.
A. Miller.
2004. Annotating WordNet.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
A. Meyers, R.
Reeves, C.
Macleod, R.
Szekely, V.
Zielinska, B.
Young, and R.
Grishman. 2004.
The NomBank Project: An Interim Report.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
E. Miltsakaki, A.
Joshi, R.
Prasad, and B.
Webber. 2004.
Annotating Discourse Connectives and Their Arguments.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
P. Sgall, J.
Panevov·a, and E.
Haji cov·a.
2004. Deep Syntactic Annotation: Tectogrammatical Representation and Beyond.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.
Z. Zabokrtsk·y and M.
Lopatkov·a. 2004.
Valency Frames of Czech Verbs in VALLEX 1.0.
In HLT-NAACL 2004 Workshop: Frontiers in Corpus Annotation, Boston, Massachusetts.

