Frozen Sentences of Portuguese: Formal Descriptions for NLP Jorge Baptista Universidade do Algarve Campus de Gambelas P-8005-139 FARO jbaptis@ualg.pt Anabela Correia Universidade do Algarve Campus de Gambelas P-8005-139 FARO Graça Fernandes Universidade do Algarve Campus de Gambelas P-8005-139 FARO Abstract This paper presents on-going research on the building of an electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of European Portuguese.
It will focus on the problems arising from the description of their formal variation in view of natural language processing 1 Introduction Defining frozen sentences is not easy, and many conceptual and terminological disputes on concurrent terms (‘idioms’, ‘collocations’, ‘phrasèmes’, etc).
can be found in the literature (M.
Gross 1988; G.Gross 1996; Mejri 1997; Mel’cuk 1993; Mogorrón-Huerta 2002; Gaatone 2000; Jurafsky & Martin 2000: 571-573; McKeown & Rodev 2000; Mutsimoto 2003: 395).
As a first approach to a (consensual)? definition, frozen sentences are elementary sentences where the main verb and at least one of its argument noun-phrases are distributionally constraint, and usually the global meaning of the expression cannot be calculated from the individual meaning of its component elements when they are used independently (M.
Gross 1982, 1989, 1996; G.
Gross 1996; Ranchhod 2003).
For that reason, the whole expression must be taken as a complex, multiword lexical unit.
For example, in: (1) O João matou dois coelhos de uma cajadada (lit: ‘John killed two rabbits with one blow’, John killed two birds with one stone) the verb-object combination (matar-coelhos) is frozen.
One cannot replace coelhos (rabbits) for another animal and the numeral determinant is necessarily dois (two).
Also, it is not possible to modify coelhos with any free adjective (dois coelhos *gordos/ *grandes, two fat/big rabbits).
In addition, the adverbial de uma cajadada (with one blow) can hardly be zeroed, or the meaning of the sentence becomes literal.
On the other hand, frozen sentences usually present some, often highly constraint, formal variation.
For the most part, this variation is strictly lexical.
In this case, in the adverbial, the noun cajadada (lit: a blow with a stick) can be replaced by assentada and vez (turn), but the meaning of the expression remains unchanged.
This variation does not happens elsewhere.
Furthermore, if we disregard proverbs 1, completely frozen sentences are rare.
Usually, one or more of its argument noun phrases are distributionally free.
In this case, any human noun can adequately occupy the structural position of subject.
The frozen verb-noun combination is responsible for this distributional constraint, which can be considerably different from the constraints imposed by the verb when functioning as an independent lexical unit.
For example, the verb matar (to kill) admits both human and non-human (animate and abstract) nouns for its subject when its object is coelhos (rabbits): (2a) O João/a raposa/o tiro/a praga matou dois coelhos (John/the fox/ shooting/ plague killed two rabbits).
Another way frozen sentences often differ from free sentences is the fact that they block transformations that should otherwise be possible, given the syntactic properties of the main verb and its arguments.
Hence, while it is possible to form from (2a) the passive sentence (2b): (2b) Dois coelhos foram mortos pelo João/ a raposa/ o tiro/ a praga (Two rabbits were killed by John/ the fox/ shoot1 Proverbs differ from frozen sentences (a) from not having any free elements, (b) in the way they function in discourse, which is similar to quotations and (c) for their general value as advices or as atemporal truths about human life.
However, partly because of their being an oral tradition, even proverbs can show some formal variation (Chacoto 1994).
Second ACL Workshop on Multiword Expressions: Integrating Processing, July 2004, pp.
72-79 ing/ plague), the same does not happen with (1): (1a) ºDois coelhos foram mortos pelo João de uma cajadada (Two rabbits were killed by John with one blow), since the meaning of the sentence becomes literal (this is shown by symbol ‘º’).
Finally, frozen sentences constitute a non-trivial problem for many NLP applications.
Since they are multiword expressions functioning as meaning units, they have to be identified as a block.
However, their elements can appear discontinuously and they can also present some formal variation.
They are often ambiguous, the same sequence having both a literal and a figurative meaning – and in this case, only an extended context can disambiguate them.
They constitute an important part of the lexicon, comparable to (but probably much larger than) simple verbs.
2 Classification
of Frozen Sentences Many frozen sentences, especially those that are most usual or most obviously idiomatic, have already been collected both in general and in specialized dictionaries of ‘idioms’.
In these dictionaries, frozen sentences are usually undistinguished from other types of multiword expressions, such as compound nouns, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, proverbs, and so on.
In order to build an electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of European Portuguese, several sources where used, including specialized dictionaries 2, and completed with newspapers, magazines, etc.
and our knowledge as native speakers of Portuguese.
The formal framework of M.
Gross (1982, 1989, 1996; see Leclère 2002, for an updated overview) was adopted to classify frozen sentences.
The classification is based on the sentence structure, the number and type of noun phrases attached to the main verb, their frozen or free nature, as well as the syntactic properties of the construction.
Table 1 shows some formal classes 3, their internal structure, an illustra2 Basically, Mello 1986, Moreira 1996, Neves 2000, Santos 1990 and Simões 1993.
The electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of Brazilian Portuguese (Vale 2001) was also consulted, but many of those sentences either do not exist if European Portuguese or else present substantial syntactical and lexical differences, so that a detailed comparative study is in order.
3 Frozen
sentences with sentential subjects or objects, or with frozen subject noun phrases were not considered in this paper.
N and C stand for noun phrases; N is a free tive example, and the approximate number of sentences collected so far.
Compared with figures available for other languages – French (+20,000; M.Gross 1996), Spanish (3,500; Mogorrón-Huerta 2002), Greek (4,500; Fotopoulou 1993) and Brazilian Portuguese (3,500; Vale 2001), it is clear that these lists are still far from complete and should, in fact, be completed, probably using other corpus-based methods for lexical acquisition (McKeown & Rodev 2000, Mutsimoto 2003).
Table 1Classification of frozen sentences (extract) Class Structure/Example Size C1 N 0 V C 1 O Pedro matou a galinha dos ovos de ouro 800 CAN N 0 V (C de N) 1 = C 1 a N 2 O Pedro arrefecer os ânimos de=à Ana 200 CDN N 0 V (C de N) 1 O Pedro queria a cabeça da Ana 100 CP1 N 0 V Prep C 1 O Pedro bateu com a porta 900 CPN N 0 V Prep (C de N) 1 O Pedro foi aos cornos do João 100 C1PN N 0 V C 1 Prep N 2 O Pedro arrastou a asa à Ana 400 CNP2 N 0 V N 1 Prep C 2 O Pedro tirou o relógio do prego 350 C1P2 N 0 V C 1 Prep C 2 O Pedro deitou mãos à obra 400 CPP N 0 V Prep C 1 Prep C 2 O Pedro foi de cavalo para burro 200 CPPN N 0 V C 1 Prep C 2 Prep C 3 O Pedro deitou o bebé fora com a água do banho 50 Total 3,500 3 Format of Dictionary The electronic dictionary is composed of several matrices, one per formal class.
In these matrices, each line is a frozen sentence and the columns contain the lexical elements of the sentence and their syntactic (distributional and transformational) properties.
The set of matrices constitute the lexicon-grammar of frozen sentences.
Table 2 is a sample of class CPN.
This class is defined by having a prepositional phrase where only the headnoun C is frozen with the verb, while its determinative complement de N (of N) is free: N 0 V Prep (C de N) 1. and C is frozen noun phrase; N 0 is the subject, N 1 and N 2 the first and second complement; V is the verb and Prep a preposition.
Table 2 – Class CPN (extract) N 0 = : N h u m N 0 = : N h u m V V s e N e g O b r i g P r e p D e t C N 1 = : N h u m N 1 = : N h u m d e N = a N d e N = P o s s Example + <acabar> com a raça + + + + O Pedro acabou com a raça da Ana + <atirar> + a os pés + + + O Pedro atirou-se aos pés da Ana + <chegar> + a os calcanhares + + + O Pedro não chega aos calcanhares da Ana + <cortar> em a casaca + + O Predro cortava na casaca da Ana + <ir> a as trombas + + O Pedro foi às trombas do João + <ir> em a cantiga + + O Pedro foi na cantiga da Ana + <ir> a a cara + + A Ana foi à cara do Pedro + <pegar> em a deixa + + + O Pedro pegou na deixa da Ana + <rir> em a cara + + + O Pedro riu na cara da Ana + <rir> + em a cara + + + O Pedro riu-se na cara da Ana + <sair> de o pelo + + O salário sai-lhe do pelo + <subir> a a cabeça + + + A fama subiu à cabeça do Pedro + <viver> em a sombra + + + O Pedro vive na sombra da Ana A B C D E F G H I J K L M 4 Syntactic Properties For lack of space, only some of the most prominent properties will be considered here.
For each sentence, the distributional constraints (human/ non-human noun) on the free noun phrases are indicated: ‘+’ if the sentence admits it, ‘-’ if it does not.
In this class, these are the subject and the determinative complement of C.
Usually, the verb can inflect freely, thus its lemma is shown in brackets < >.
In some sentences, V presents an intrinsically reflexive construction (noted Vse): (3) O Pedro atirou-se aos pés da Ana <e pediulhe para ficar> (Peter threw himself to the feet of Ana <and begged her to stay>.
The reflex pronoun cannot be replaced by a noun phrase of the same distributional nature but not coreferent to the subject: O Pedro atirou *o João / ºo livro aos pés da Ana (Peter threw John/the book to the feet of Ana).
Usually, this reflex pronoun cannot be zeroed.
However, some verbs allow this zeroing of the pronoun: (4) O Pedro riu(-se) na cara da Ana (Peter laughs (himself) at the face of Ana).
In this case, the simplest way is to double the entry.
Also in some cases, there is an obligatory negation (NegObrig): (5) O Pedro não /nunca /nem chega aos calcanhares da Ana (lit: Peter does not/never/not even gets to the heels of Ana, Peter is not a match for Ana).
The half-frozen noun phrase can often undergo an operation called dative restructuring (Leclère 1995), that splits the noun phrase in two and where the determinative complement becomes a dative complement a N (to N) of the verb: (6) O Pedro foi às trombas do João = ao João (lit: Peter went to the snouts of/to John, Peter hit John).
This operation depends on the metonymical relation between C and the noun of its free determinative complement.
The new dative complement can be reduced to a dative clitic pronoun (-lhe): (6a) Pedro foi-lhe (= ao João) às trombas do João.
However, dative restructuring must be systematically checked for each sentence, since some sentences do not admit it: (7) O Pedro foi na cantiga do João/ *ao João/ *-lhe (lit: Peter went in the song of John, Peter was persuaded by John’s ill-intended words).
In some cases, however, the restructured noun phrase: (8a) O salário do Pedro sai-lhe do pelo (lit: Peter’s salary gets him out from the fur, To earn his salary, Peter has to work very hard) is much more acceptable than its basic form: ? *O salário sai do pelo do Pedro (The salary gets out from Peter’s fur) 4 . The determinative complement can also be reduced to an oblique or to a possessive pronoun: (7a) O Pedro foi na cantiga do João = na cantiga dele = na sua cantiga, but in some cases, the reduction to a possessive is blocked: (6b) O Pedro foi às trombas do João = ? às trombas dele = * ? às suas trombas.
Finally, there can be some facultative, free insertions be4 In this case, the pronouncing may blocked by the (double) metonymical relation of Pedro with both the head noun of both the subject and object noun phrase.
tween the verb and the prepositional phrase: (9) A fama subiu (rapidamente/logo) à cabeça do Pedro (Fame went up (quickly/soon) to Peter’s head).
As one can see, these properties may be independent from each other and some of them can appear in combination in the same sentence.
For example, obligatory negation can combine with the reduction do possessive pronoun: (5a) O Pedro não chega aos seus calcanhares (lit: Peter does not get to the his heels, Peter is not a match for him) or with the dative pronoun resulting from the noun phrase restructuring: (5b) O Pedro não te chega aos calcanhares (lit: Peter does not get you to the heels, Peter is not a match for you).
In both cases, the pronouns appear inserted between the characteristic (and fixed) elements of this frozen sentence.
Figure 1.
Reference graph for class CPN 5 Lexical Finite-State Transducers: building a reference graph The lexicon-grammar of frozen sentences (i.e.
the set of matrices) cannot be directly applied to recognize these expressions in texts.
Using INTEX linguistic development platform (M.
Silberztein 1993, 2004) 5 it is now possible to build lexical finite state transducer that can identify and tag frozen sentences in the texts where they occur.
This is done by building a reference graph for each matrix.
Fig. 1 (above) shows a simplified version of the reference graph for class CPN.
This graph describes the formal sequences of the components of the frozen sentences.
In this graph, variables such as @X refer to the content of the matrix (at column X).
Furthermore, this graph is an enhanced transducer, where it is possible to define variables containing strings of elements and to reuse these variables in the transduction.
5 http://www.nyu.edu/pages/linguistics/intex/.
For example, in the top line of the graph, variable V (inside brackets) stores the verb (represented by @C).
This is followed by a facultative subgraph, for any eventual insertions (in the shadowed box), and it is then followed by variable CP1, containing the frozen prepositional phrase.
The two variables are then reused in the transduction (the output in bold, on the right), providing the multiword lexical entry and its adequate tags: $V $PC1,@C @F @G @H @I.V+CPN, so that for the frozen sentence: (7c) O Pedro foi na cantiga do João the system would produce the tag: O Pedro {foi na cantiga,ir em a cantiga.V+CPN} do João.
Notice that the inflected form of the verb appearing in the text is lemmatized (after the coma) using the @X variables to retrieve the lexical elements in the matrix: in this case, the infinitive ir (to go); also in the lemma, the contraction (na) of preposition em and the definite article a is split in its component elements.
Finally, variables @D, @E, @K and @L function as switches, reading the ‘+’ or ‘-’ of the corresponding columns in the matrix so that the remaining transitions are either activated or collapsed.
These variables correspond to the syntactic properties of the entries.
In this way, it is possible to compile a detailed FST that complies with the syntactic restrictions described in the matrix.
After building the reference graph, the system is then able to compile the lexical transducer for this class, exploring, for each line of the matrix, all the paths of the graph, and then determinizing and minimizing the resulting transducer.
With this methodology, the linguistic information stored in the lexicon grammar is represented independently from the lexical transducers and can be regularly revised or updated.
The reference graph can also be seen as describing linguistic information regarding the surface disposition of the lexical elements entering the frozen sentences of the matrix.
Of course, strict formal coherence in needed between the reference graph and the matrix.
6 Application
to texts: some experiences In order to evaluate the performance of the electronic dictionary on real texts, experiences were made using INTEX 6 on three different texts.
Two smaller texts, one obtained from the on-line edition of the Expresso weekly newspaper 7 and the other a composite text 8 obtained from several sources and used on the MorphOlimpics evalua6 We also used an electronic dictionary of simple words of Portuguese (Ranchhod et al.1999), from the public linguistic resources built by LabEL: http://label.ist.utl.pt.
7 http://www.expresso.pt/.
This is a 976 Kb text, with 83,269 (5,764 different) words.
8 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpia das/ts_ml.txt [29-03-2004] This is a 215 Kb text, with 35,053 (10,070 different) words.
tion campaign for Portuguese 9 . We also used a larger, publicly available, journalistic corpus (CETEM-Público) 10 . Tables 3 to 5 show results from the application of the modules of the four largest classes to these texts: Table 3 – Application of dictionary of frozen sentences to text from Portuguese MorphOlimpics Class DLE ≠L M Precision C1 6 6 6 100 % C1P2 1 1 1 100 % C1PN 5 5 6 100 % CP1 5 5 5 100 % Totals 17 17 18 100 % Table 4 – Application of dictionary of frozen sentences to text from Expresso newspaper Class DLE ≠L M Precision C1 15 13 16 75 % C1P2 2 2 2 100 % C1PN 24 18 33 94 % CP1 37 32 39 100 % Totals 78 65 90 93 % Table 5 – Application of dictionary of frozen sentences to text from CETEMPúblico Class DLE ≠L M Precision C1 541 217 939 78.4 % C1P2 104 61 157 99.0 % C1PN 434 96 1,357 96.5 % CP1 963 309 1,270 88.2 % Totals 2,042 638 3,723 89.6 % DLE – number of inflected lexical entries obtained from the text; ≠L – number of different lemmas; M – number of matched strings in text.
These preliminary results must take into consideration the different size of the texts (number of words) and the number of matched sequences.
Several comparisons are thus made in Table 6 (below).
The size (in number of simple words W) of Expresso is approximately 2.4 times larger than MorphOlimpics, and the size of CETEMPúblico is 116 times larger than Expresso: W(Exp)=2.4xW(MO);W(Pub)=116xW(Exp).
Naturally, the number of matches (M) does not increase in the same proportion: 9 http://acdc.linguateca.pt/aval_conjunta/morfolimpiad as/index.html [29-03-2004].
10 http://www.linguateca.pt/CETEMPublico/.
Only the first fragment of this corpus was used.
This is a text file of approximately 60 Mb, with 9.6 million (177,368 different) words.
M(Exp)=5xM(MO);M(Pub)=41.38xM(Exp). In fact, in the smaller texts, precision scores are not very significant in view of the reduced number of matches.
However, precision does not drop abruptly in the larger corpus (CETEM-Público), even if the size of the text and the number of matches increase significantly.
Table 6 – Size of texts and scores of dictionary of frozen sentences (Classes C1, C1P2, C1PN, CP1) Text W ≠W {S} MO 35,053 10,070 527 Exp 83,269 5,764 8060 Pub 9,632,623 177,368 447,125 Text DLE ≠L M CM P(%) MO 17 17 18 18 100.0 Exp 78 65 90 84 93.0 Pub 2,042 638 3,725 3,336 89.6 Text LexDiv LexDiv/P CMDiv CMDiv/P FS/S (‰) MO 1.000 1.000 1.059 1.059 3.416 Exp 1.200 1.286 1.292 1.385 1.042 Pub 3.201 3.574 5.229 5.839 0.746 MO – MorphOlimpics; Exp – Expresso; Pub – CETEMPúblico; W – number of simple words; ≠W – different simple words; {S} – sentences; DLE – lexical entries of frozen sentences; ≠L –different lemmas of lexical entries; M – matches; CM – correct matches; P – Precision (%); LexDiv – lexical diversity of DLE (DLE/≠L); CMDiv – lexical diversity of correct matches (CM/≠L); FS/S – average number of frozen sentences per thousand sentences (‰).
Another measure is the ratio between the lexical diversity (LexDiv) of DLE (number of entries/different lemmas) and precision (P).
The higher the diversity of the DLE, the lower should be the precision.
This, however, does not happen: even if the larger corpus shows lower DLE diversity, the ratio LexDiv/P is higher than in the two smaller texts.
Therefore, lower precision in CETEMPúblico is not significant.
Similarly, one could compare ratio between the lexical diversity of correct matches (correct matches/different lemmas) and precision.
In theory, this ratio should be smaller if the lexical diversity of correct matches were higher.
Instead, CETEMPúblico shows a higher CMDiv/P ratio than the two smaller texts, therefore confirming the significance of the precision rate obtained with the frozen sentences’ dictionary.
Finally, we present, as an indication of frequency, the average number of correctly matched frozen sentences per thousand sentences in each text.
This varies from 1.042 ‰ (Expresso) to 0.746 ‰ (CETEMPúblico).
7 Discussion
As it was said above, precision of the results is relatively high.
In fact, most word combinations in the dictionary of frozen sentences are unique, therefore, unambiguous combinations.
The finitestate approach adopted here is based on matching strings that could correspond to the characteristic word sequence of each frozen sentence.
However, going through the concordances manually, some incorrect matches were detected and it would be impossible to comment on all those cases here, so only a few cases (all from CETEMPúblico), will be discussed.
Mostly, mismatches were due to morphologically (orthographically) ambiguous words.
In the sentence: O general António Ramalho Eanes está de volta à cena política (General António Ramalho Eanes is back to the political scene) volta is not verb, but a noun.
Still, this noun is a nominalization of voltar (with a resultative aspectual value): voltar à cena = estar de volta a cena, so that the overall meaning is stil the same.
Other nominalizations of the same kind were also founded, e.g. usar da palavra = fazer uso da palavra (to speak, in a formal situation).
Therefore, the study of frozen sentences with verbal predicates should be extended to their corresponding nominalizations (M.
Gross 1986).
Another interesting aspect of this example is the fact that the noun cena appears with the adjective política (political, referring to politics).
In the dictionary, the entry of the frozen sentence was just voltar à cena.
As one can see, it will still be necessary to complete the dictionary allowing C to be modified by this kind of adjectives, with which they form compound nouns (G.
Gross 1988).
Sometimes, the matched string is formally ambiguous with free constructions: Como resultado, a Comunidade dá de si uma imagem de paralisia (Has a result, the Community gives of itself an image of paralysis).
The expression dar de si (class CP1) usually has a non-human subject meaning ‘to break’,’to fall apart’.
In this case, however, we have a construction of the noun imagem, with two distributionally free complements, such as we find in the next example: Isso deu uma imagem negativa da comunidade (That gave a negative image of the community).
If it were possible to identify the noun phrase a Comunidade and its head as a human noun, and to associate a construction to the noun imagem, the ambiguity would not arise, since the distributional properties stated in the CP1 matrix for dar de si would prevent it from being tagged.
However, this goes well beyond the mere task of lexical analysis and it would require some parsing procedure to avoid the incorrect lexical tag.
Ambiguity also arises from the syntactic operations underwent by a free sentence.
These transformations may produce strings that are superficially identical to frozen sentences.
In the following example: […] e em vez de se dirigir às máquinas, foi para a rua que Júlia Pinho teve de caminhar […] (instead of approaching the machines, it was to the street that JP had to walk), we find a cleft sentence with the form foi of verb ser (to be).
This sentence can be obtained from: JP teve de caminhar para a rua (JP had to walk to the street).
Now, foi of verb ser (to be) is ambiguous with foi of verb ir (to go/walk) appearing in the frozen sentence ir para a rua (lit: to go to the street, ‘to be fired’).
Again, ambiguous strings will not be resolved unless some syntactic parsing is done in order to recognize transformations (in this case, clefting).
The components of certain frozen sentences may, also, be particularly apt to become ambiguous strings.
For example, in the expression fazer das suas (lit: to do of his-fem.pl., to do mischief) the possessive pronoun is a lexical constant, invariable in both gender, and number, while agreeing in person with the subjet: Fergie tornou fazer das suas (Fergie has done mischief again).
However, the possessive often appears as a mere determinant on a free construction, e.g.
João Honrado nunca fez das suas certezas uma muralha de arrogância (JH has never done of his certainties a wall of arrogance).
One could think that people tend avoid this kind of ambiguity, but it is not always so: 6 out of 14 matched sequences fazer das suas do not correspond to the frozen sentence.
Likewise, with the expression partir do zero/nada (to start from scratch) 7 out of 14 matches correspond to the compound adverb a partir do zero/nada (from scratch).
Notice also that this frozen adverb, undoubtedly related with the frozen sentence but appearing with various verbs, also composed of a compound preposition a partir de (from), so the expression is three times ambiguous grammatically.
A similar ambiguity between occurs between frozen sentence N 0 dizer respeito a N 2 (N 0 concerns to N 1 ; 299 matches) and the related compound adverb no que diz respeito a N (concerning N; 215 matches).
Finally, while most frozen sentences constitute unique word combinations and present a clearcut, single meaning (however difficult it may be to define it precisely), more rarely, some of them show multiple meanings.
This is the case of entrar em campo (to enter the field) or entrar em cena (enter the scene) used in some sports or in theater jargon and as a general metaphor to ‘begin some activity’.
These multi-meaning frozen sentences can be dealt with in the same way as polisemic simple words, by multiplying the number of entries in the lexicon-grammar.
8 Final
words Being an on-going research, it is still too early to write ‘conclusions’.
We believe that with the continuation of current work the size of the electronic dictionary of frozen sentences of European Portuguese will still increase in a significant way.
Present experiments on large corpora will undoubtedly contribute to this goal.
Statistical methods for collecting frozen sentences should be combined with our more traditional method of perusing dictionaries.
Finite-state techniques prove to be adequately for the lexical analysis of frozen sentences.
Frozen sentences constitute an important part of multiword lexical units of any language.
Their identification is an essential part of lexical analysis of texts in view of many NLP applications.
They present several, non-trivial difficulties to this task.
They may be formed of non-adjacent words or allow some lexically constraint variation of some of their elements.
They allow several syntactic transformations, but those operations are lexically determined.
They may be ambiguous with free sentences, depending on the linear arrangement of their components.
Their accurate recognition may often depend on the previous syntactic parsing of the sentence, which may include checking the semantic attributes of nearby noun phrases.
On the other hand, parsing depends on the availability of information regarding multiword lexical units.
Acknowledgement Research for this paper was partially funded by FCT-MCES (project grant POSI/PLP/34729/99).
References Araújo-Vale, Oto, 2001.
Expressões Cristalizadas do Português do Brasil: Uma Proposta de Tipologia (Ph.D.
Thesis). Araquara (Brazil): UNESP.
Chacoto, Lucília, 1994.
Estudo e Formalização das Propriedades Léxico-Sintácticas das Expressões Fixas Proverbiais.
(M.A. Thesis).
Lisbon: FLUL.
Fotopoulou, Aggeliki, 1993.
Une classification des phrases à compléments figés en grec moderne.
(PhD Thesis).
Paris : Univ.
Paris 8.
Gaatone, David, 2000.
A quoi sert la notion d’ «expression figée» ?, in Buvet, P.-A., D.
le Pesant, M.
Mathieu-Colas (eds.), Lexique, Syntaxe et Sémantique, BULAG (hors série), Besançon : Centre Lucien Tesnière/PUFC, pp.
295-308. Gross, Gaston, 1988.
Degrée de figement des noms composés.
Langages 90.
Paris : Larousse, pp.57-72.
Gross, Gaston, 1996.
Les Expressions Figées en Français.
Paris: Ophrys.
Gross, Maurice 1982.
Une classification des phrases ‘figées’ du français.
Revue Québécoise de Linguistique 11-2.
Montréal : UQAM, p.
151-185. Gross, Maurice 1986.
Les nominalisations d’expressions figées.
Langue Française 69, Paris: Larousse, pp.
64-84. Gross, Maurice 1988.
Les limites de la phrase figée.
Langages 90.
Paris: Larousse, pp.
7-22. Gross, Maurice 1989.
Les expressions figées : une description des expressions françaises et ses conséquences théoriques.
Rapport Téchnique 8.
Paris : LADL-Univ.
Paris 7 / CERIL.
Gross, Maurice 1996.
Lexicon-Grammar. in K.
Brown and J.
Miller (eds.).
Concise Encyclopedia of Syntactic Theories.
Cambridge: Pergamon, pp.
244-259. Jurafsky, Daniel and James H.
Martin, 2000, Speech and Language Processing.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Leclère, Christian, 1995.
Sur une restructuration dative.
Language Research 31-1.
Seoul: LRISeoul National Univ, pp.
179-198. Leclère, Christian, 2002.
Organization of the LexiconGrammar of French Verbs, Linguisticae Investigationes 25-1, Amesterdam: John Benjamins Pub.
Co., pp.
29-48. McKeown, Kathleen R.
and Dragomir Rodev, 2000, Collocations, in Dale, R., H.
Moisl and H.
Sommers (eds).
Handbook of Natural Language Processing.
New York: Marcel Dekker Inc., pp.
507-523. Mejri, Salah, 1997.
Le figment lexical.
Description linguistique et structuration sémantique.
La Manouba (Tunis) : Pub.
Fac. Lettres.
Mel’cuk, I, 1993.
La phraseologie et son rôle dans l’enseignment / apprentissage d’une langue étrangère.
ELA, Didier Érudition, pp.
82-113. Mello, Fernando R., 1986.
Nova Recolha de Provérbios Portugueses e Outros Lugares-Comuns (2 nd . ed.).
Lisbon: Ed.
Afrodite. Mogorrón-Huerta, Pedro, 2002.
La expressividad en las locuciones verbales españolas y francesas.
Alicante: Pub.
Univ. Alicante.
Moreira, António, 1996.
Provérbios Portugueses.
Lisbon : Ed.
Notícias. Mutsimoto, Yuji, 2003.
Lexical Knowledge Acquisition, in Miktov, R.
(ed). The Oxford Handbook of Computational Linguistics.
Oxford: OUP, pp.
395-413. Neves, Orlando, 2000.
Dicionário de Expressões Correntes (2 nd . ed).
Lisbon: Ed.
Notícias. Ranchhod, Elisabete, Cristina Mota, Jorge Baptista, 1999.
A Computational Lexicon for Automatic Text Parsing, Proceedings of SIGLEX’99: ACL/NScF, pp.
74-80. Ranchhod, Elisabete M., 2003.
O lugar das expressões ‘fixas’ na gramática do Português.
in Castro, I.
and I.
Duarte (eds.), Razão e Emoção, vol.
II, Lisbon: INCM, pp.
239-254. Santos, António, 1990.
Novos Dicionários de Expressões Idiomáticas.
Lisbon: João Sá da Costa.
Silberztein, Max, 1993.
Dictionnaires électroniques et analyse automatiques de textes : le système INTEX.
Paris : Masson.
Silberztein, Max, 2004.
Intex Manual.
http://intex.univ-fcomte.fr/downloads/Manual.pdf Simões, Guilherme A., 1993.
Dicionário de Expressões Populares Portuguesas.
Lisbon: D. Quixote .

