References Masayuki Asahara and Chooi Ling Goh and Xiaojie Wang and Yuji Matsumoto.
2003. Combining segmenter and chunker for chinese word segmentation.
SIGHAN workshop on Chinese Language Processing.
Keh-Jiann Chen and Ming-Hong Bai.
1997. Unknown word detection for Chinese by a corpus-based learning method.
ROCLING X.
Keh-Jiann Chen and Wei-Yun Ma.
2002. Unknown word extraction for chinese documents.
COLING. Guohong Fu and K.
K. Luke.
2003. An integrated approach for chinese word segmentation.
PACLIC 17.
Guohong Fu and Xiaolong Wang.
1999. Unsupervised Chinese Word Segmentation and unknown word identification.
NLPRS. Changning Huang.
1997. Segmentation problem in chinese processing.
Applied Linguistics.
Taku Kudo and Yuji Matsumoto.
2001. Chunking with support vector machines.
NAACL. Yu-Sheng Lai and Chung-Hsien Wu.
1999. Unknown word and phrase extraction using a phrase-like-unit-based likelihood ratio.
ICCPOL '99.
Mu Li and Jianfeng Gao and Changning Huang and Jianfeng Li.
2003. Unsupervised training for overlapping ambiguity resolution in chinese word segmentation.
SIGHAN workshop on chinese language processing.
Xiao Luo and Maosong Sun and Benjamin K.
Tsou. 2002.
Covering ambiguity resolution in Chinese word segmentation based on contextual information.
COLING. Wei-Yun Ma and Keh-Jiann Chen.
2003. A bottom-up merging algorithm for Chinese unknown word extraction.
SIGHAN workshop on Chinese language processing.
Jian-Yun Nie and Marie-Louise Hanna and Wanying Jin.
1995. Unknown word detection and segmentation of chinese using statistical and heuristic knowledge.
Communications of COLIPS.
Erik F.
Tjong Kim Sang and John Veenstra.
1999. Representing text chunks.
EACL. Dayang Shen and Maosong Sun and Changning Huang.
1998. The application and implementation of local statistics in chinese unknown word identification.
Communications of COLIPS.
Richard Sproat and Thomas Emerson.
2003. The first international chinese word segmentation bakeoff.
SIGHAN workshop on chinese language processing.
Kiyotaka Uchimoto and Qing Ma and Masaki Murata and Hiromi Ozaku and Hitoshi Isahara.
2000. Named entity extraction based on a maximum entropy model and transformational rules.
ACL. Vladimir N.
Vapnik. 1995.
The nature of statistical learning theory.
Springer. Nianwen Xue and Susan P.
Converse. 2002.
Combining classifiers for chinese word segmentation.
SIGHAN workshop on chinese language processing.
Hua-Ping Zhang and Qun Liu and Hao Zhang and Xue-Qi Cheng.
2002. Automatic recognition of chinese unknown words based on roles tagging.
SIGHAN workshop on chinese language processing.
Hua-Ping Zhang and Hong-Kui Yu and De-Yi Xiong and Qun Liu.
2003. HHMM-based chinese lexical analyzer ICTCLAS.
SIGHNA workshop on chinese language processing.
Guo-Dong Zhou and Kim-Teng Lua.
1997. Detection of unknown chinese words using a hybrid approach.
Computer processing of oriental language.

