Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Building Educational Applications Using NLP, pages 53–60, Ann Arbor, June 2005.
c©Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005 Direkt Profil: ASystemforEvaluatingTextsofSecond LanguageLearners ofFrench BasedonDevelopmental Sequences JonasGranfeldt 1 PierreNugues 2 EmilPersson 1 LisaPersson 2 FabianKostadinov 3 MalinÅgren 1 Suzanne Schlyter 1 1 Dept.
of Romance Languages 2 Dept.
of Computer Science 3 Dept.
of Computer Science LundUniversity LundUniversity Universityof Zurich Box 201,22100 Lund,Sweden Box 118,221 00Lund,Sweden CH-8057 Zurich,Switzerland {Jonas.Granfeldt, Malin.Agren, Suzanne.Schlyter}@rom.lu.se emil.person@telia.com nossrespasil@hotmail.com Pierre.Nugues@cs.lth.se fabian.kostadinov@access.unizh.ch Abstract Direkt Profil is an automatic analyzer of texts written in French as a second language.
Its objective is to produce an evaluation of the developmental stage of students under the form of a grammatical learner profile.
Direkt Profil carries out asentence analysis based on developmental sequences, i.e. local morphosyntactic phenomena linked toadevelopment inthe acquisition of French.
The paper presents the corpus that we use to develop the system and briefly, the developmental sequences.
Then,itdescribes the annotation that we have defined, the parser, and the user interface.
We concludebytheresultsobtained sofar: onthe test corpus the systems obtains a recall of 83% and a precision of 83%.
1 Introduction
With few exceptions, systems for evaluating language proficiency and for Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) do not use Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques.
Typically, existing commercial and non-commercial programs apply some sort of pattern-matching techniques to analyze texts.
These techniques not only reduce the quality and the nature of the feedback but also limit the range of possible CALLapplications.
In this paper, we present a system that implements an automatic analysis of texts freely written by learners.
Research on Second Language Acquisition (SLA) has shown that writing your own text in a communicative and meaningful situation with a feedback and/or an evaluation of its quality and its form constitutes an excellent exercise to develop second language skills.
The aim of the program, called Direkt Profil,is to evaluate the linguistic level of the learners’ texts in the shape of a learner profile.
To analyze sentences, the program relies on previous research on second language development in French that itemized a number of specific constructions corresponding to developmental sequences.
2 The
CEFLE Lund Corpus For the development and the evaluation of the system, we used the CEFLE corpus (Corpus Écrit de Français Langue Étrangère de Lund “Lund Written Corpus of French as a Foreign Language”).
This corpus currently contains approximately 100,000 words (Ågren, 2005).
The texts are narratives of varied length and levels.
We elicited them by asking 85 Swedish high-school students and 22 young French to write stories evoked by a sequence of images.
Figure 1 shows pictures corresponding to one of them: Le voyage en Italie “The journey to Italy”.
The goal of the system being to analyze French as a foreign language, we used the texts of the French native speakers as control group.
The following narrative is an example from a be53 ginner learner: Elles sont deux femmes.
Elles sont a italie au une vacanse.
Mais L’Auto est très petite.
Elles va a Italie.
Au l’hothel elles demande une chambre.
Un homme a le clé.
Le chambre est grande avec deux lies.
Il fait chaud.
C’est noir.
Cette deux femmes est a une restaurang.
Dans une bar cet deux hommes.
Ils amour les femmes.
Ils parlons dans la bar.
Ils ont tres bien.
Le homme et la femme participat a un sightseeing dans la Rome.
Ils achetons une robe.
La robe est verte.
La femme et l’homme reste au un banqe.
Ils c’est amour.
La femme et l’homme est au une ristorante.
es hommes va avec les femmes.
L’auto est petite.
This text contains a certain number of typical constructions for French as a foreign language: parataxis, very simple word order, absence of object pronouns, basic verb forms, agreement errors, spelling mistakes.
Research on the acquisition of French as a foreign language has shown that these constructions (and others) appear in a certain systematic fashion according to the proficiency level of the learners.
With Direkt Profil, we aim at detecting automatically these structures and gathering them so that they represent a grammatical learner profile.
This learner profile can ultimately be used to assess learners’ written production in French.
3 DirektProfiland
PreviousWork Direkt Profilisananalyzer oftextswritteninFrench as a foreign language.
It is based on the linguistic constructions that are specific to developmental sequences.
We created an annotation scheme to mark up these constructions and we used it to describe them systematically and detect them automatically.
The analyzer parses the text of a learner, annotates the constructions, and counts the number of occurrences ofeachphenomenon.
Theresult isatextprofile based on these criteria and, possibly, an indication of the level of the text.
A graphical user interface (GUI) shows the results to the user and visualizes by different colors the detected structures.
It is important to stress that Direkt Profil is not a grammar checker.
The majority of the tools in the field can be described as writing assistants.
They identify and sometimes correct spelling mistakes and grammatical errors.
The line of programs leading to PLNLP (Jensen et al., 1993) and NLPWin (Heidorn, 2000) is one of the most notable achievements.
The grammatical checker of PLNLP carries out a complete parse.
Itusesbinary phrase-structure rulesandtakes into account some dependency relations.
PLNLP is targeted primarily, but not exclusively, to users writing in their mother tongue.
It was created for English and then applied to other languages, including French.
Other systems such as FreeText (Granger et al., 2001) and Granska (Bigert et al., 2005) are relevant to the CALL domain.
FreeText is specifically designed to teach language and adopts a interactive approach.
It uses phrase-structure rules for French.
In case of parsing failure, it uses relaxed constraints to diagnose an error (agreement errors, for example).
Granska, unlike FreeText, carries out a partial parsing.
The authors justify this type of analysis by a robustness, which they consider superior and which makesitpossible toaccept moreeasily incorrect sentences.
4 An
AnalysisBased onDevelopmental Sequences The current systems differ with regard to the type of analysis they carry out: complete or partial.
The complete analysis of sentences and the correction of errors are difficult to apply to texts of learners with (very) low linguistic level since the number of unknown words and incorrect sentences are often extremely high.
We used a test corpus of 6,842 words to evaluate their counts.
In the texts produced by learners at the lowest stage of development, Stage 1, nearly 100% of the sentences contained a grammatical error (98.9% were incorrect 1 )and 24.7% ofthe words were unknown.
2 At
this stage of development, any complete analysis of the sentences seems very difficulttous.
Ontheotherhand,inthecontrolgroupthe 1 An “incorrectsentence” wasdefined asasentence containing at least one spelling, syntactic, morphological, or semantic error.
2 An
“unknown word” is a token that does not appear in the lexicon employed by the system (ABUCNAM, see below) 54 Figure 1: Le voyage en Italie “The journey to Italy”.
corresponding figures are 32.7% for incorrect sentences and 10.6% for unknown words.
More importantly, thisanalysis showsthatusingaquantification of “unknown words” and “incorrect sentences” only is insufficient to define the linguistic level of learners’ texts.
Learners at Stage 3 have in fact fewer incorrect sentences than learners from Stage 4 (70.5% vs.
80.2%). Moreover, the percentage of unknown words in the control group (the natives) is slightly higher than that of learners from the Stage 4 (10.6% vs.
10.4%). Thus, the simple count of errors is also insufficient todistinguish moreadvanced learners from natives.
To identify properly and to define learners of various linguistic levels, we need more detailed analyses and more fine-grained measures.
This is exactly the purpose of the developmental sequences and learner profiles implemented in Direkt Profil.
5 DevelopmentalSequences
inFrench DirektProfilcarriesoutananalysisoflocalphenomena related to a development in the acquisition of French.
These phenomena are described under the form of developmental sequences.
The sequences are the result of empirical observations stemming fromlargelearnercorporaofspokenlanguage(Bartning and Schlyter, 2004).
They show that certain grammatical constructions are acquired and can be produced in spontaneous spoken language in a fixed order.
Clahsen and al.
(1983) as well as PienemannandJohnston,(1987)determineddevelopmental sequences for German and spoken English.
For spoken French, Schlyter (2003) and Bartning and Schlyter (2004) proposed 6 stages of development anddevelopmentalsequencescoveringmorethan20 local phenomena.
These morphosyntactic phenomena are described under the form of local structures inside the verbal or nominal domain.
Table 1 shows asubsetofthesephenomena.
Itisamatterofcurrent debate in field of SLA to what extent these developmental sequences are independent of the mother tongue.
The horizontal axis indicates the temporal development for a particular phenomenon: The developmental sequence.
The vertical axis indicates the set of grammatical phenomena gathered in such way that they make up a “profile” or a stage of acquisition.
To illustrate better how this works, we will compare the C (finite verb forms in finite contexts) and G(object pronouns) phenomena.
55 At Stage 1, the finite and infinitive forms coexist in finite contexts.
As the main verb of the sentence, we find in the learners’ production je parle (transcription of /je parl/ analyzed as a “finite form”) as wellas/jeparle/i.e.
*jeparler or*jeparlé.
Thecurrent estimation is that in Stage 1, there are between 50 and 75% of finite forms in finite contexts.
At Stage 4,the percentage of finite forms has increased to 90–98%.
For this morphological phenomenon, the developmental sequence describes a successive “morphologization”.
The G phenomenon concerns the developmental sequence of object pronouns.
The first object pronouns are placed in a postverbal position according to the scheme Subject-Verb-Object (SVO), e.g.
*je vois le/la/lui (instead of je le/la vois).
At Stage 3, learners canproduce phrases according totheSvOV scheme (Pronoun-Auxiliary-Object-Verb): Je veux le voir (correct) but also *j’ai le vu (incorrect).
At Stage5,weobservejel’aivu.
Forthissyntacticphenomenon, the developmental sequence describes a change inthelinear organization oftheconstituents.
6 Annotation
The concept of group, either noun group or verb group, correct or not, represents the essential grammatical support of our annotation.
The majority of syntactic annotation standards forFrench takes such groups into account in one way or another.
Gendner et al.(2004) is an example that reconciles a great number of annotations.
These standards are however insufficient to mark up all the constructions in Table 1.
We defined a text annotation specificto Direkt Profil based on the inventory of the linguistic phenomena described by Bartning and Schlyter (2004) (Table 1).
We represented these phenomena by decision trees whose final nodes correspond to a category of analysis.
The annotation uses the XML format and annotates the texts using 4 layers.
Only the 3 rd layer is really grammatical: • The first layer corresponds to the segmentation of the text in words.
• The second layer annotates prefabricated expressions or sentences (e.g.
je m’appelle).
These structures correspond to linguistic expressions learned “by heart” in a holistic fashion.
It has been shown that they have a great importanceinthefirstyearsoflearningFrench.
• The third layer corresponds to a chunk annotation of the text, restricted to the phenomena to identify.
This layer marks up simultaneously each word with its part-of-speech and the verb and noun groups to which they belong.
The verb group incorporates subject clitic pronouns.
The XML element span marks the groups and features an attribute to indicate their class in the table.
The tag element annotates the words with attributes to indicate the lemma, the part-of-speech, and the grammatical features.
The verb group in the sentence Ils parlons dans la bar extracted from the learner text above is annotated as: <span class="p1_t1_c5131"><tag pos="pro:nom:pl:p3:mas">Ils</tag> <tag pos="ver:impre:pl:p1"> parlons </tag></span> dans la bar.
The class denoted p1_t1_c5131 corresponds to a “finite lexical verb, no agreement”.
• The fourth layer counts structures typical of an acquisition stage.
It uses the counter XML element, <counter id="counter.2" counter_name="passe_compose" rule_id="participe_4b" value="1"/>.
7 Implementation
The running version of Direkt Profil is restricted to the analysis of the verb groups and clitic pronouns.
For each category in Table 1, the program identifies the corresponding constructions in a text and counts them.
The analyzer uses manually written rules and a lexicon of inflected terms.
The variety of the constructions contained in the corpus is large and in order not to multiply the number of rules, we chose a constraint reinforcement approach.
Conceptually, the analyzer seeks classes of phrase structures in which all the features are removed.
It gradually identifies the structures while varying the feature 56 Ph.
Stages 1 2 3 4 5 6 A.
% of sentences containing averb (in a conversation) 20–40% 30–40% 50% 60% 70% 75% B.
% of lexical verbs showing +/-finite opposition (types) No opp.
%infinite forms 1–3sg 10–20% of types in opposition About50% in opposition Mostinopposition All in opposition + C.
%offinite forms of lexical verbs in obligatory contexts (occurrences) Finite forms 50%–75% Finite forms 70–80% Finite forms: 80–90% Finite forms: 90–98% Finite forms: 100% + D.
1 st,2 nd,3 rd pers.
sing. (copula/aux) est, a, va No opposition: J’ai/ c’est Opposition j’ai – il a je suis – il est Isolated errors *je va, *je a + + + E.
%of1 st pers.
pluralS-Vagreement nous V-ons (occurrences) – 70–80% 80–95% Errors in complex constructions + + F.
3 rd pers.
plural S-V agreement with viennent, veulent, prennent – – ils *prend Isolated cases of agreement 50% of cases with agreement Some problems remain + G.
Object pronouns (placement) – SVO S(v)oV SovV appears Productive +(y, en) H.
% of gender agreement Article-Noun (occurrences) 55–75% 60–80% 65–85% 70–90% 75–95% 90– 100% Table 1: Developmental sequences adapted from Schlyter (2003); Bartning and Schlyter (2004).
Legend: – = no occurrences; + = acquired at a native-like level; aux = auxiliary; pers.
= person; S-V = Subject-Verb 57 values.
The recognition of the group boundaries is done by a set of closed-class words and heuristics inside the rules.
It thus follows an old but robust strategy used in particular by Vergne (1999), inter alia, for French.
Direkt Profil applies a cascade of three sets of rules to produce the four annotation layers.
The first unit segments the text in words.
An intermediate unit identifies the prefabricated expressions.
Thethirdunitannotates simultaneously theparts-ofspeech and the groups.
Finally, the engine creates a group of results and connects them to a profile.
It should be noted that the engine neither annotates all the words, nor all segments.
It considers only those whicharerelevantforthedetermination ofthestage.
The engine applies the rules from left to right then from right to left to solve certain problems of agreement.
The rules represent partial structures and are divided into a condition part and an action part.
The condition partcontains thesearch parameters.
Itcan bealemma,aregularexpression,oraclassofinflection.
The engine goes through the text and applies the rules using a decision tree.
It tests the condition part to identify the sequences of contiguous words.
Each rule produces a positive (“match”) or negative (“no match”) result.
The rules are applied according to the result of the condition part and annotate thetext,countthenumberofoccurrences ofthephenomenon,andconnecttoanotherrule.
Bytraversing thenodesofthetree,theenginememorizestherules it has passed as well as the results of the condition parts of these rules.
When arriving at a final node, the engine applies the action parts of all the rules.
The engine finds the words in a dictionary of inflected terms.
It does not correct the spelling mistakes except for the accents and certain stems.
Learners frequently build erroneous past participles inferringawronggeneralization ofstems.
Anexample is the word *prendu (taken) formed on the stem prend|re and of the suffix-u.
We used a lexicon available from the Association des Bibliophiles Universels’ web site (http://abu.cnam.fr/) that we corrected and transposed into XML.
We also enriched it with verb stems.
8 Interface
Direkt Profil merges the annotation levels in a result object.
This object represents the original text, the annotation, the trace of the rule application, and the counters.
The result object, which can be saved, is then transformed by the program to be presented to the user.
The display uses the XHTML 1.1 specifications which can be read by any Web browser.
Direkt Profil has a client-server architecture where theserver carries out theannotation ofatext andthe client collects the text with an input form and interacts with the user.
Figure 2 shows a screenshot of Direkt Profil’s GUI displaying the analysis of the learner text above.
The interface indicates to the user by different colors all the structures that the analyzer detected.
9 Resultsand
Evaluation We evaluated Direkt Profil with a subset of the CEFLEcorpus.
Wechose20textsrandomlydistributed on 4 learner stages.
We also used 5 texts coming from the control group.
In this version, we did not test the correction of the misspelled words: accent and stems.
Table 2 shows some statistics on the size ofthetextsandTable3showstheresults intheform of recall and precision.
The results show that Direkt Profil detects well the desired phenomena.
It reveals also interesting differences according to the levels of the texts.
The results show that Direkt Profil analyzes better the learner texts than the texts from the native French adolescents (control group).
Without knowing exactly why, we note that it suggests that the adopted strategy, which aims at analyzing texts in French as a foreign language, seems promising.
10 Conclusionand
Future Work Wepresented a system carrying out a machine analysisoftextsbasedondevelopmentalsequences.
The goalistoproduce alearnerprofile.
Webuiltaparser anddevelopedasetofrulestoannotatethetexts.
DirektProfilisintegratedinaclient-server architecture andhasaninterfaceallowingtheinteractionwiththe user.
The results show that it ispossible to describe the vast majority of the local structures defined by the 58 Figure 2: The graphical user interface.
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Control Total Number of analyzed texts 5 5 5 5 5 25 Word count 740 1233 1571 1672 1626 6842 Sentence count 85 155 166 126 107 639 Average text length (in words) 148 247 314 334 325 274 Average length of sentences (in words) 8.7 7.9 9.5 13.3 15.2 10.9 Table 2: Test corpus.
Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Stage 4 Control Total Reference structures 23 97 101 119 85 425 Detected structures 27 98 100 112 92 429 Correctly detected structures 15 81 89 96 73 354 Non detected structures 5 16 12 20 11 ()64 Overdetected structures 10 17 11 17 19 ()74 Recall 65% 84% 88% 81% 86% 83% Precision 56% 83% 89% 86% 79% 83% F-measure 0.6 0.83 0.89 0.83 0.82 0.83 Table 3: Results.
59 developmental sequences under the form of rules.
Direkt Profil can then detect themand automatically analyze them.
We can thus check the validity of the acquisition criteria.
In the future, we intend to test Direkt Profil in teaching contexts to analyze and specify, in an automatic way, the grammatical level of a learner.
The program could be used by teachers to assess student texts as well as by the students themselves as a selfassessment and as a part of their learning process.
A preliminary version of Direkt Profil is available on line from this address http://www.rom.lu.se:8080/profil References Malin Ågren.
2005. Le marquage morphologique du nombre dans la phrase nominale.
une étude sur l’acquisitiondufrançaisL2écrit.
Technicalreport,Institut d’étudesromanesdeLund.LundUniversity.
Inge Bartning and Suzanne Schlyter.
2004. Stades et itinérairesacquisitionnelsdesapprenantssuédophones en français l2.
Journal of French Language Studies, 14(3):281–299.
Johnny Bigert, Viggo Kann, Ola Knutsson, and Jonas Sjöbergh.
2005. Grammar checking for Swedish second language learners.
In CALL for the Nordic Languages, Copenhagen Studies in Language, pages 33– 47.CopenhagenBusiness School,Samfundslitteratur.
Harald Clahsen, Jürgen M.
Meisel, and Manfred Pienemann.
1983. Deutsch als Fremdsprache.
Der Spracherwerb ausländischer Arbeiter.
Narr, Tübingen.
Véronique Gendner, Anne Vilnat, Laura Monceaux, Patrick Paroubek, and Isabelle Robba.
2004. Les annotations syntaxiques de référence peas.
Technical report, LIMSI, Orsay.
http://www.limsi.fr/Recherche/CORVAL/easy/ PEAS_reference_annotations_v1.6.html.
Sylviane Granger, Anne Vandeventer, and Marie-Josée Hamel.
2001. Analyse de corpus d’apprenants pour l’ELAO basé sur le TAL.
Traitement automatique des langues,42(2):609–621.
GeorgeE. Heidorn.
2000. Intelligent writing assistance.
In Robert Dale, Hermann Moisl, and Harold Somers, editors, Handbook of Natural Language Processing.
MarcelDekker. Karen Jensen, George E.
Heidorn, and Stephen D.
Richardson. 1993.
Natural Language Processing: The PLNLP Approach.
KluwerAcademicPublishers. Manfred Pienemann and Malcolm Johnston.
1987. Factors influencing the development of second language proficiency.
In David Nunan, editor, Applying secondlanguageacquisitionresearch,pages45–141.NationalCurriculumResourceCentre,Adelaide.
Suzanne Schlyter.
2003. Stades de développement en français L2.
Technical report, Institut d’études romanes de Lund, Lund University.
http://www.rom.lu.se/durs/ STADES_DE_DEVELOPPEMENT_EN _FRANCAIS_L2.PDF.
Jacques Vergne.
1999. Étude et modélisation de la syntaxe des langues à l’aide de l’ordinateur.
Analyse syntaxiqueautomatiquenoncombinatoire.Synthèseet Résultats.
Habilitation à diriger des recherches, UniversitédeCaen,29septembre.

