Proceedings of the ACL-ISMB Workshop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies and Databases: Mining Biological Semantics, pages 32–37, Detroit, June 2005.
c©2005 Association for Computational Linguistics MedTag: A Collection of Biomedical Annotations L.H.
Smitha0, L.
Tanabea0, T.
Rind escha1, W.J.
Wilbura0 a0 National Center for Biotechnology Information a1 Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications NLM, NIH, 8600 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20894 a2 lsmith,tanabe,wilbur a3 @ncbi.nlm.nih.gov rind esch@nlm.nih.gov Abstract We present a database of annotated biomedical text corpora merged into a portable data structure with uniform conventions.
MedTag combines three corpora, MedPost, ABGene and GENETAG, within a common relational database data model.
The GENETAG corpus has been modi ed to re ect new de nitions of genes and proteins.
The MedPost corpus has been updated to include 1,000 additional sentences from the clinical medicine domain.
All data have been updated with original MEDLINE text excerpts, PubMed identi ers, and tokenization independence to facilitate data accuracy, consistency and usability.
The data are available in at les along with software to facilitate loading the data into a relational SQL database from ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/lsmith /MedTag/medtag.tar.gz.
1 Introduction
Annotated text corpora are used in modern computational linguistics research and development to netune computer algorithms for analyzing and classifying texts and textual components.
Two important factors for useful text corpora are 1) accuracy and consistency of the annotations, and 2) usability of the data.
We have recently updated the text corpora we use in our research with respect to these criteria.
Three different corpora were combined.
The ABGene corpus consists of over 4 000 sentences annotated with gene and protein named entities.
It was originally used to train the ABGene tagger to recognize gene/protein names in MEDLINE records, and recall and precision rates in the lower 70 percentile range were achieved (Tanabe and Wilbur, 2002).
The MedPost corpus consists of 6 700 sentences, and is annotated with parts of speech, and gerund arguments.
The MedPost tagger was trained on 3 700 of these sentences and achieved an accuracy of 97.4% on the remaining sentences (Smith et.
al., 2004).
The GENETAG corpus for gene/protein named entity identi cation, consists of 20 000 sentences and was used in the BioCreative 2004 Workshop (Yeh et.
al., 2005; Tanabe et.
al., 2005) (only 15 000 sentences are currently released, the remaining 5 000 are being retained for possible use in a future workshop).
Training on a portion of the data, the top performing systems achieved recall and precision rates in the lower 80 percentile range.
Because of the scarcity of good annotated data in the realm of biomedicine, and because good performance has been obtained using this data, we feel there is utility in presenting it to a wider audience.
All of the MedTag corpora are based on MEDLINE abstracts.
However, they were queried at different times, and used different (but similar) algorithms to perform tokenization and sentence segmentation.
The original annotations were assigned to tokens, or sequences of tokens, and extensively reviewed by the authors at different times for the different research projects.
The main goals in combining and updating these 32 MedTag Collection MedPost ABGene GENETAG 6,700 sentences 5,700 molecular biology 1,000 clinical medicine 60 part-of-speech tags 97.4% accuracy 1 annotator 4,265 sentences Molecular Biology Single Genes/Proteins tagged 1 annotator 15,000 sentences 50% Molecular Biology 50% Other Biomedical All Genes/Proteins tagged 3 annotators EXCERPT ID PubMed ID Corpus code Original text Citation ANNOTATION ID Corpus code Character offsets Annotated text Data Model SQL Relational Database with Web Interface MEDLINE MEDLINE Figure 1: Component corpora, common data model and main record types of the MedTag collection.
corpora into a single corpus were to 1.
update the text for all corpora to that currently found in MEDLINE, storing a correct citation and the original, untokenized text for each excerpt 2.
eliminate tokenization dependence 3.
put all text and annotations into a common database format 4.
provide programs to convert from the new corpus format to the data formats used in previous research 2 Merging the Corpora We describe what was done to merge the original corpora, locating original sources and modifying the text where needed.
An overview is given in Figure 1.
Some basic statistics are given in Table 1.
2.1 Identifying
Source Data The original data of the three corpora were assembled and the text was used to search MEDLINE to Corpus sentences tokens most frequent tag GENETAG-05 15,000 418,246 insulin GENE(112) MedPost 6,700 181,626 the DD(8,507) AbGene 4,265 123,208 cyclin GENE(165) MedPost Adj Adv Aux Noun Punct Verb 14,648 4,553 56,262 60,732 21,806 23,625 GENETAG-05 GENE ALTGENE 24,562 19,216 ABGene GENE ALTGENE 8,185 0 Table 1: MedTag Corpora.
GENE = gene and protein names, ALTGENE = acceptable alternatives for gene and protein names.
MedPost tagset contains 60 parts of speech which have been binned here for brevity.
nd the closest match.
An exact or near exact match was found for all but a few excerpts.
For only a few excerpts, the MEDLINE record from which the excerpt was originally taken had been removed or modi ed and an alternative sentence was selected.
Thus, each excerpt in the database is taken from a MEDLINE record as it existed at one time in 2004.
In order to preserve the reference for future work, the PubMed ID and citation data were also retrieved and stored with each excerpt.
Each excerpt in the current database roughly corresponds to a sentence, although the procedure that extracted the sentence is not speci ed.
2.2 Eliminating
Tokenization Dependence In the original ABGene and GENETAG corpora, the gene and protein phrases were speci ed by the tokens contained in the phrase, and this introduced a dependence on the tokenization algorithm.
This created problems for researchers who wished to use a different tokenization.
To overcome this dependence, we developed an alternative way of specify33 ing phrases.
Given the original text of an excerpt, the number of non-whitespace characters to the start of the phrase does not depend on the tokenization.
Therefore, all annotations now refer to the rst and last character of the phrase that is annotated.
For example the protein serum LH in the excerpt There was no correlation between serum LH and chronological or bone age in this age group, which suggests that the correlation found is not due to age-related parallel phenomena.
is speci ed as characters 28 to 34 (the rst character is 0).
2.3 Data
Model There are two main record types in the database, EXCERPT and ANNOTATION.
Each EXCERPT record stores an identi er and the original corpus code (abgene, medpost, and genetag) as well as subcorpus codes that were de ned in the original corpora.
The original text, as it was obtained from MEDLINE, is also stored, and a human readable citation to the article containing the reference.
Each ANNOTATION record contains a reference to the excerpt (by identi er and corpus), the character offset of the rst and last characters of the phrase being annotated (only non-whitespace characters are counted, starting with 0), and the corresponding annotation.
The annotated text is stored for convenience, though it can be obtained from the corresponding excerpt record by counting nonwhitespace characters.
The data is provided as an ASCII le in a standard format that can be read and loaded into a relational database.
Each record in the le begins with a line of the form a4a5a4 table name where table name is the name of the table for that record.
Following the table name is a series of lines with the form eld: value where eld is the name of the eld and value is the value stored in that eld.
Scripts are provided for loading the data into a relational database, such as mysql or ORACLE.
SQL queries can then be applied to retrieve excerpts and annotations satisfying any desired condition.
For example, here is an SQL query to retrieve excerpts from the MedPost corpus containing the token p53 and signaling or signalling Figure 2: A screen capture of the annotator’s interface and the GENETAG-05 annotations for a sentence.
select text from excerpt where text like ’%p53%’ and text rlike ’signa[l]*ing’; 2.4 Web Interface A web-based corpus editor was used to enter and review annotations.
The code is being made available, as is, and requires that the data are loaded into a mysql database that can be accessed by a web server.
The interface supports two annotation types: MedPost tags and arbitrary phrase annotations.
MedPost tags are selectable from a pull-down menu of preprogrammed likely tags.
For entering phrase annotations, the user highlights the desired phrase, and pressing the enter key computes and saves the rst and last character offsets.
The user can then enter the annotation code and an optional comment before saving it in the database.
A screen dump of the phrase annotations for a sentence in the genetag corpus is shown in gure 2.
The data from the database was dumped to the at le format for this release.
We have also included some les to accommodate previous users of the corpora.
A perl program, alt eval.perl is in34 cluded that replaces the GENETAG evaluation program using non-whitespace character numbers instead of token numbers.
Copies of the ABGene and MedPost corpora, in the original formats, are also included.
3 Updates
of Component Corpora 3.1 MedPost Update The MedPost corpus (Smith et.
al., 2004) originally contained 5 700 tokenized sentences.
An additional 1 000 annotated sentences have been added for this release.
Each sentence in the MedPost corpus is fully tokenized, that is, divided into non-overlapping annotated portions, and each token is annotated with one of 60 part of speech tags (see Table 1).
Minor corrections to the annotations have been made since the original release.
Since most of the original corpus, and all of the sentences used for training the MedPost tagger, were in the area of molecular biology, we added an additional 1 000 sentences selected from random MEDLINE abstracts on the subject of clinical medicine.
As a preliminary result, the trained MedPost tagger achieves approximately 96.9% accuracy, which is comparable to the 97.4% accuracy achieved on the subset of 1 000 sentences selected randomly from all of MEDLINE.
An example of a sentence from the clinical medicine collection is EvidenceNN isVBZ nowRR availableJJ toTO showVVI aDD bene cialJJ effectNN ofII beza brateNN onII retardingVVGN atheroscleroticJJ processesNNS andCC inII reducingVVGN riskNN ofII coronaryJJ heartNN diseaseNN. In addition to the token-level annotations, all of the gerunds in the MedPost corpus (these are tagged VVGN) were also examined and it was noted whether the gerund had an explicit subject, direct object, or adjective complement.
This annotation is stored with an annotation of type gerund.
To illustrate, the two gerunds in the previous example, retarding and reducing both have direct objects (retarding processes and reducing risk), and the gerund tag is entered as o . The gerund annotations have been used to improve a noun phrase bracketer able to recognize gerundive phrases.
3.2 GENETAG
Update GENETAG is a corpus of MEDLINE sentences that have been annotated with gene and protein names.
The closest related work is the GENIA corpus (Kim et.
al., 2003).
GENIA provides detailed coverage of a large number of semantic entities related to a speci c subset of human molecular biology, whereas GENETAG provides gene and protein name annotations only, for a wide range of organisms and biomedical contexts (molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, clinical medicine, etc.) We are including a new version of GENETAG, GENETAG-05, as part of the MedTag system.
GENETAG-05 differs from GENETAG in four ways: 1) the de nition of a gene/protein entity has been modi ed, 2) signi cant annotation errors in GENETAG have been corrected, 3) the concept of a non-speci c entity has been re ned, and 4) character-based indices have been introduced to reduce tokenization problems.
We believe that these changes result in a more accurate and robust corpus.
GENETAG-05 maintains a wide de nition of a gene/protein entity including genes, proteins, domains, sites, sequences, and elements, but excluding plasmids and vectors.
The speci city constraint requires that a gene/protein name must be included in the tagged entity.
This constraint has been applied more consistently in GENETAG-05.
Additionally, plain sequences like ATTGGCCTTTAAC are no longer tagged, embedded names are tagged (ras-mediated), and signi cantly more terms have been judged to violate the speci city constraint (growth factor, proteases, protein kinase, ribonuclease, snoRNA, rRNA, tissue factor, tumor antigen, complement, hormone receptors, nuclear factors, etc.).
The original GENETAG corpus contains some entities that were erroneously tagged as gene/proteins.
Many of these errors have been corrected in the updated corpus.
Examples include camp-responsive elements, mu element, VDRE, melanin, dentin, myelin, auxin, BARBIE box, carotenoids, and cellulose.
Error analysis resulted in the updated annotation conventions given in Table 1.
Enzymes are a special class of proteins that catalyze biochemical reactions.
Enzyme names have varying degrees of speci city, so the line drawn for 35 tagging purposes is based on online resources1 as well as background knowledge.
In general, tagged enzymes refer to more speci c entities than untagged enzymes (tyrosine kinase vs.
protein kinase, ATPase vs.
protease). Enzymes that can refer to either DNA or RNA are tagged if the reference is speci ed (DNA endonuclease vs.
endonuclease). Enzymes that do not require DNA/RNA distinction are tagged (lipase vs.
ligase, cyclooxygenase vs.
methylase). Non-speci c enzymes are tagged if they clearly refer to a gene or protein, as in (1).
1) The structural gene for hydrogenase encodes a protein product of molecular mass 45820 Da.
Semantic constraints in GENETAG-05 are the same as those for GENETAG.
To illustrate, the name in (2) requires rabies because RIG implies that the gene mentioned in this sentence refers to the rabies immunoglobulin, and not just any immunoglobulin.
In (3), the word receptor is necessary to differentiate IGG receptor from IGG, a crucial biological distinction.
In (4), the number 1 is needed to accurately describe a speci c type of tumor necrosis factor, although tumor necrosis factor alone might be adequate in a different context.
2) rabies immunoglobulin (RIG) 3) IGG receptor 4) Tumor necrosis factor 1 Application of the semantic constraint can result in apparent inconsistencies in the corpus (immunoglobulin is suf cient on its own in some sentences in the corpus, but is insuf cient in (2)).
However, we believe it is important that the tagged entity retain its true meaning in the sentence context.
4 Recommended
Uses We have found the component corpora of MedTag to be useful for the following functions: 1) Training and evaluating part-of-speech taggers 2) Training and evaluating gene/protein named entity taggers 1http://cancerweb.ncl.ac.uk/omd/copyleft.html http://www.onelook.com/ 3) Developing and evaluating a noun phrase bracketer for PubMed phrase indexing 4) Statistical analysis of grammatical usage in medical text 5) Feature generation for machine learning The MedPost tagger was recently ported to Java and is currently being employed in MetaMap, a program that maps natural language text into the UMLS (Aronson,A.R., 2001).
5 Conclusion
We have merged three biomedical corpora into a collection of annotations called MedTag.
MedTag uses a common relational database format along with a web interface to facilitate annotation consistency.
We have identi ed the MEDLINE excerpts for each sentence and eliminated tokenization dependence, increasing the usability of the data.
In GENETAG05, we have clari ed many grey areas for annotation, providing better guidelines for tagging these cases.
For users of previous versions of the component corpora, we have included programs to convert from the new standardized format to the formats used in the older versions.
References Aronson, A.
R. 2001.
Effective mapping of biomedical text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap program.
Proc. AMIA Symp., 1721.
Kim, J.-D., Ohta, T., Tateisi, Y.
and Tsujii, J.
2003. GENIA corpus: a semantically annotated corpus for biotextmining.
Bioinformatics, 19: 180 182.
Tanabe, L and Wilbur, WJ.
2002. Tagging gene and protein names in biomedical text.
Bioinformatics, 18, 1124-1132.
Tanabe L, Xie N, Thom, LH, Matten W, Wilbur, WJ: GENETAG: a tagged gene corpus for gene/protein named entity recognition.
BMC Bioinformatics 2005.
Smith, L, Rind esch, T, and Wilbur, WJ.
2004. MedPost: a part of speech tagger for biomedical text.
Bioinformatics, 20(13) 2320-2321.
Yeh A, Hirschman L, Morgan A, Colosimo M: BioCreAtIvE task 1A: gene mention nding evaluation.
BMC Bioinformatics 2005 .

