Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Psychocomputational Models of Human Language Acquisition, pages 1–9, Ann Arbor, June 2005.
c©2005 Association for Computational Linguistics The Input for Syntactic Acquisition: Solutions from Language Change Modeling Lisa Pearl Linguistics Department, University of Maryland 1401 Marie Mount Hall, Colege Park, MD 20742 llsp@wam.umd.edu Abstract Sparse data is a well-known problem for any probabilistic model.
However, recent language acquisition proposals sugest that the data children learn from is heavily restricted children learn only from unambiguous trigers (Fodor 198, Dresher 199, Lightfoot 199) and degree-0 data (Lightfoot 191).
Surprisingly, we show that these conditions are a necessary feature of an accurate language acquisition model.
We test these predictions indirectly by developing a mathematical learning and language change model inspired by Yang’s (203, 200) insights.
Our logic is that, besides accounting for how children acquire the adult grammar so quickly, a viable acquisition proposal must also be able to account for how populations change their grammars over time.
The language change we examine is the shift in Old English from a strongly Object-Verb (OV) distribution to a strongly Verb-Object (VO) distribution between 100 A.D. and 120 A.D., based on data from the YCOE Corpus (Taylor et al.203) and the PPCME2 Corpus (Kroch & Taylor 200).
Grounding our simulated population with these historical data, we demonstrate that these acquisition restrictions seem to be both sufficient and necessary for an Old English population to shift its distribution from strongly OV to strongly VO at the right time.
1 Introduction
Empirically investigating what data children attend to during syntactic acquisition is a difficult task.
Traditional experimental methods are not feasible on logistical and ethical grounds – we can’t simply lock a group of children in a room for two years, restrict their input to whatever we want, and then see if their syntactic acquisition matches normal patterns.
However, when we have a simulated group of language learners who folow a quantified model of individual acquisition, this is exactly what we can do – restrict the input to syntactic acquisition in a very specific way and then observe the results.
The individual acquisition model we use is inspired by Yang’s (203, 200) model of probabilistic learning for multiple grammars.
By using this model in a simulated population of individuals, we provide empirical suport for two acquisition proposals that restrict children to only heed data that are unambiguous trigers (Dresher 199, Lightfoot 199, Fodor 198) and that appear in degree-0 clauses (Lightfoot 191).
We use language change as a metric of “correct” acquisition, based on the folowing idea: if the simulated population that has these restrictions behaves just as the real population historically did, the simulated acquisition process is fairly similar to the real acquisition process.
Language change is an excellent yardstick for acquisition proposals for exactly this reason – any theory of acquisition must not only be able to account for how children converge to a close approximation of the adult grammar, but also how they can “misconverge” slightly and allow specific types of grammatical change over time.
The nature of this “misconvergence” is key.
Children must end up with an Internal Language (“grammar”) that is close enough but not to close to the Observable Language (O-Language) in the population so that change can happen at the right pace.
The language change we use as our metric is the shift in Old English from a strongly ObjectVerb (OV) distribution to a strongly Verb-Object (VO) distribution between 100 and 120 A.D. 1 The sharpest part of this shift occurs between 150 and 120 A.D., based on data from the YCOE Corpus (Taylor et al.203) and the PPCME2 Corpus (Kroch & Taylor 200).
We use this corpus data to estimate the initial OV/VO distribution in the modeled population at 100 A.D. and to calibrate the modeled population’s projected OV/VO distribution between 100 and 150 A.D.
Then, we demonstrate that the restrictions on acquisition seem both sufficient and surprisingly necessary for the simulated Old English population to shift its distribution to be strongly VO by 120 A.D – and thus match the historical facts of Old English.
In this way, we provide empirical suport that we would be hardpressed to get using traditional methods for these acquisition proposals.
The rest of the paper is laid out as folows: section 2 elaborates on the two acquisition proposals of unambiguous trigers and degree-0 data; section 3 gives specific implementations of these proposals for Old English; section 4 describes the model used to simulate the population of Old English speakers and how the historical corpus data was used; sections 5 and 6 present the results and conclusion.
2 The
Acquisition Proposals The first proposal is set in a Principles and Parameters framework (Chomsky 1981) where the adult grammar consists of a specific set of parameter values and the process of acquisition is figuring out what those values are.
An unambiguous triger (Fodor 198, Dresher 199, Lightfoot 199) is a piece of data from the Olanguage that unambiguously signals one parameter value over another for a given parameter.
Crucially, an unambiguous triger for value P 1 of parameter P can be parsed only with value P 1 (and not P 2 ), no matter what other parameter values (A, B, C, …) might also be affecting the O-language form of the data.
Because an unambiguous triger corresponds to exactly one parameter P and thus can alter the value of P only, this proposal would allow children to bypass the Credit Problem noted by Dresher (199), which is the problem of deciding which parameters to update given a particular piece of input.
In addition, unambiguous trigers allow the learner to bypass the combinatoric explosion problem that could occur when trying to set n parameters.
Instead of having to test out 2 n different grammars on the input in the Olanguages, the child’s language acquisition mechanism simply tests out the n parameters separately by loking for unambiguous trigers for these n parameters in the input from the Olanguage.
Thus, this proposal aids the process of acquiring the adult grammar quickly and correctly.
A potential pitfall of this proposal is data sparseness: the quantity of data that fits this very specific restriction might be very small for a parameter P and the child just might not see enough of it for it to have an effect 1. The second proposal is that children only heed data in degree-0 clauses (Lightfoot 191) when they first begin to set their syntactic parameter values.
“Degree” refers to the level of embedding, so a degree-0 clause corresponds to a main clause 2 . (1) Jack thought the giant was easy to fool.
[--Degree-0-] [---------Degree-1---------] The basis for this proposal is that while local grammatical relationships (such as those in degree0 clauses) provide a lot of information to the learner, degree-0 data tends to be “messier” grammatically – that is, more grammatical processes seem to apply to degree-0 clauses than to degree-1 clauses.
The messier status of this data allows the child to converge to a grammar that is not exactly the same as the adult grammar.
Thus, this proposal focuses on how to allow small grammatical changes to occur in individuals so that larger changes can happen to the population over time.
The cost of combining this proposal with the previous one is that the child is now restricted to learn only from degree-0 unambiguous trigers, thereby compounding the potential data sparseness problem that unambiguous trigers already have.
1 In
fact, it may wel be necesary to restrict the set of parameters relevant for determining if a triger is unambiguous to some initial pol in order to get any unambiguous trigers at al.
A candidate set for the initial pol of parameters might be derived from a hierarchy of parameters along the lines of the one based on cros-linguistic comparison that is described in Baker (201, 205).
2 The
exact domain of a degree-0 clause is defined as the main clause and the front of the embeded clause for theory-internal reasons.
For a more detailed description and explanation, se Lightfoot (191).
2 3 Old English Change Alowing language change to occur as it historically did is a mark of “correct” acquisition, especially for change involving syntactic parameters that can only be altered during acquisition any change that builds up in the population must be due to changes that occur during acquisition.
The parameter we use in this work is OV/VO word order and the change is a shift in Old English from a strongly OV distribution between 100 and 150 A.D. to a strongly VO distribution at 120 A.D.
A strongly OV distribution has many uterances with OV order (2).
A strongly VO distribution as many uterances with VO order (3).
(2) he Gode flancode he God thanked ‘He thanked God’ (Beowulf, 625) (3) fla ahof Paulus up his heafod then lifted Paul up his head ‘Then Paul lifted his head up’ (Blickling Homilies, 187.35) Because change can occur only during acquisition, the data children are heeding in their input during acquisition has a massive effect on the population’s linguistic composition over time.
In this work, we explore the posibility that the data children are heeding during acquisition are the degree-0 unambiguous trigers.
For Old English, the unambiguous trigers have the form of (4a) and (5a).
Examples of unambiguous trigers of each kind are in (4b-c) and (5b-c).
(4a) Unambiguous OV Triger [Object Verb/Verb-Marker] VP (4b) he Subj [hyne Obj gebidde VerbFinite Subj Obj Verb [mid ennum mode] P ] VP PP (Ælfric's Letter to Wulfsige, 87.107) (4c) we Subj sculen VerbFinite [[ure yfele +teawes] Obj Subj Verb Obj forl+aten Verb-Marker ] VP Verb-Marker (Alcuin's De Virtutibus et Vitis, 70.52) (5a) Unambiguous VO Triger [Verb/Verb-Marker Object] VP (5b) & [mid his stefne] P he Subj [awec+d VerbFinite PP Subj Verb deade Obj [to life] P ] VP Obj P (Saint James, 30.31) (5c) þa Adv ahof VerbFinite Paulus Subj [up Verb-Marker Adv Verb Subj Verb-arker [his heafod] Obj ] VP Obj (Blickling Homilies, 187.35) The Object is adjacent to either a Verb or a VerbMarker on the appropriate side – the correct Olanguage order.
In addition to this correct “surface order” in the O-language, an unambiguous triger must also have an unambiguous derivation to produce this surface order.
This means that no other combination of parameters with the alternate word order value could produce the observed surface order.
For example, a Subject Verb Object uterance could be produced more than one way because of the Verb-Second (V2) movement parameter which was also available in Old English (as in modern Dutch and German).
With V2 movement, the Verb moves from its “underlying” position to the second position in the sentence.
(6a) V2 Movement Ambiguity Subject Verb Object t Verb . (OV + V2) Subject Verb t Verb Object.
(VO + V2) (6b) Subject Verb Object example heo Subj cl+ansa+d VerbFinite Subj Verb [+ta sawle +t+as r+adendan] Object Obj (Alcuin De virtutibus et vitis, 83.59) 3 (6c) Subject Verb t Subj Object t Verb . (parsed with OV + V2) heo Subj cl+ansa+d VerbFinite t Subj Subj Verb [[+ta sawle +t+as r+adendan] Obj Obj t VerbFinite ] VP trace-Vb (6d) Subject Verb t Subj t Verb Object.
(parsed with VO + V2) heo Subj cl+ansa+d VerbFinite t Subj Subj Verb [ t VerbFinite [+ta sawle +t+as r+adendan] Object ] VP trace-Vb Obj Because of this, a Subject Verb Object uterance can be parsed with either word order (OV or VO) and so cannot unambiguously signal either order.
Thus, correct surface order alone does not suffice – only an uterance with the correct surface order and that cannot be generated with the competing word order value is an unambiguous triger 3 . Because V2 movement (among other kinds of movement) can move the Verb away from the Object, Verb-Markers can be used to determine the original position of the Verb with respect to the Object.
Verb-Markers include particles (‘up’), non-finite complements to finite verbs (‘shall…perform’), some closed-clas adverbials (‘never’), and negatives (‘not’) as described in Lightfoot (191).
The curious fact about Old English VerbMarkers (unlike their modern Dutch and German counterparts) is that they were unreliable – often they moved away from the Object as well, leaving nothing Verb-like adjacent to the Object.
This turned uterances which potentially were unambiguous trigers for either OV or VO order into ambiguous uterances which could not help acquisition.
We term this “triger destruction,” and it has the effect of making the distribution of OV and VO uterances that the child uses during 3 We note that this could potentialy be very resource-intensive to determine since al other interfering parameter values (such as V2) must be taken into acount.
Hence, there is ned for some restriction of what parameters must be initialy considered to determine if an uterance contains an unambiguous triger for a given parameter.
acquisition (the distribution in the degree-0 unambiguous trigers) diferent from the distribution of the OV and VO uterances in the population.
It is this difference that “biases” children away from the distribution in the population and it is this difference that wil cause small grammatical changes to accumulate in the population until the larger change emerges – the shift from being strongly OV to being strongly VO.
Thus, the question of what data children heed during acquisition has found a very suitable testing ground in Old English.
4 The
Model 4.1 The Acquisition Model & Old English Data The acquisition model in this work is founded on several ideas previously explored in the acquisition modeling and language change literature.
First, grammars with oposing parameter values (such as OV and VO order) compete with each other both during acquisition (Clack & Robert 193) and within a population over time (Pintzuk 202, among others).
Second, population-level change is the result of a build-up of individual-level “misconvergences” (Niyogi & Berwick, 197, 196, 195).
Third, individual linguistic behavior can be represented as a probabilistic distribution of multiple grammars.
This is the result of multiple grammars competing during acquisition and stil existing after acquisition.
Multiple grammars in an individual are instantiated as that individual accesing g grammars with probability p g each (Yang 203).
In our simulation, there are two grammars (g = 2) – one with the OV/VO order set to OV and one with the OV/VO order set to VO.
In a stable system with g=1, g 1 has probability p g1 = 1 of being accessed and all unambiguous trigers come from this grammar.
In the unstable system for our language change, g=2 and g 1 is accessed with probability p g1 while g 2 is accessed with probability p g2 = 1 – p g1 . Both grammars leave unambiguous trigers in the input to the child.
If the quantity of unambiguous trigers from each grammar is approximately equal, these quantities wil effectively cancel each other out (whatever quantity puls the child towards OV wil be counterbalanced by the quantity of trigers puling the child towards VO).
Therefore, the 4 crucial quantity is how many more unambiguous trigers one grammar has than the other, since this is the quantity that wil not be cancelled out.
This is the advantage a grammar has over another in the input.
Table 1 shows the advantage in the degree-0 (D0) clauses and degree-1 (D1) clauses that the OV grammar has over the VO grammar in Old English at various points in time, based on the data from the YCOE (Taylor et al.203) and PPCME2 (Kroch & Taylor 200) corpora.
D0 OV Adv D1 OV Adv 100 A.D. 1.6% 1.3% 100 – 150 A.D 0.2 7.7 120 A.D. -0.4% 4 -19.1% Table 1.
OV grammar’s advantage in the input for degree-0 (D0) and degree-1 (D1) clauses at various points in time of Old English.
The corpus data shows a 1.6% advantage for the OV grammar in the D0 clauses at 100 A.D. – which means that only 16 out of every 100 sentences in the input are actually doing any work for acquisition (and more specifically, puling the child towards the OV grammar).
The data also show that the D1 advantage is much stronger.
However, this does not help our learners for two reasons: a) Based on samples of modern children’s input (4K from CHILDES (MacWhiney & Snow 1985) and 4K from young children’s stories (for details on this data, see Pearl (205)), D1 clauses only make up ~16% of modern English children’s input.
If we assume that the quantity of D1 input to children is approximately the same no matter what time period they live in 5, then our Old English children also heard D1 data in their input ~16% of the time.
b) Our learners can only use D0 data, anyway.
This leads to two questions for the restrictions imposed by the acquisition proposals a question of sufficiency and a question of necessity.
First, 4 A negative advantage for OV advantage means the VO gramar has the advantage.
5 At
this point in time, we are unaware of any studies that sugest that the composition of motherese, for example, has altered significantly over time.
we can simply ask if these restrictions on the data children heed are sufficient to allow the Old English population to shift from OV to VO at the appropriate time.
Then, suposing that they are, we can ask if these restrictions are necessary to get the job done – that is, wil the population shift correctly even if these restrictions do not hold?
We can relax both the restriction to learn only from unambiguous trigers and the restriction to learn only from degree-0 clause data – and then see if the population can stil shift to a strongly VO distribution on time.
4.2 The
Acquisition Model: Implementation The acquisition model itself is based around the idea of probabilistic access function of binary parameter values (Bock & Kroch 1989) in an individual.
For example, if an individual has a function that accesses the VO order value 30% of the time, the uterances generated by that individual would be VO order 30% of the time and OV order 70% of the time.
Note that this is the distribution before other parameters such as V2 movement alter the order, so the O-language distribution produced by this speaker is not 30-70.
However, the O-language distribution wil stil have some unambiguous OV trigers and some unambiguous VO trigers, so a child hearing data from this speaker wil have to deal with the conflicting values.
Thus, a child wil have a probabilistic access function to account for the OV/VO distribution– and acquisition is the process of setting what the VO access probability is, based on the data heard during the critical period.
The VO access value ranges from 0.0 (all OV access) to 1.0 (all VO access).
A value of 0.3, for example, would correspond to accessing VO order 30% of the time.
A child begins with this value at 0.5, so there is a 50% chance of accessing either OV or VO order.
Two mechanisms help summarize the data the child has seen so far without using up computing resources: the Noise Filter and a modified Batch Learner Method (Yang 203).
The Noise Filter acts as a buffer that separates “signal” from “noise”.
An unambiguous triger from the minority grammar is much more likely to be construed as “noise” than an unambiguous triger from the majority grammar.
An example use is 5 below with the VO access value set to 0.3 (closer to pure OV than pure VO): 6) Noise Filter Use probabilistic value of VO access = 0.3 if next unambiguous triger = VO = “noise” with 70% chance and ignored = “signal” with 30% chance and heeded if next unambiguous triger = OV = “noise” with 30% chance and ignored = “signal” with 70% chance and heeded The initial value of VO access of 0.5, so there is no bias for either grammar when determining what is “noise” and what is “signal”.
The modified Batch Learner method deals with how many unambiguous trigers it takes to alter the child’s current VO access value.
The more a grammar is in the majority, the smaller the “batch” of its trigers has to be to alter the VO access value (see Table 2).
The current VO access value is used to decide whether a grammar is in the majority, and by how much.
VO Value OV Trigers Required VO Trigers Required 0.0-0.2 1 5 0.2-0.4 2 4 0.4-0.6 3 3 0.6-0.8 4 2 0.8-1.0 5 1 Table 2.
How many unambiguous trigers from each grammar are required, based on what the current VO access value is for the child.
Below is an example of the modified Batch Learner method with the VO access value set to 0.3: 7) modified Batch Learner method use probabilistic value of VO access = 0.3 if next unambiguous triger = VO if 4 th VO triger seen, alter value of VO access towards VO else if next unambiguous triger = OV if 2 nd OV triger seen, alter value of VO access towards OV The initial value of 0.5 means that neither grammar requires more trigers than the other at the begining to alter the current value.
Both mechanisms rely on the probabilistic value of VO access to reflect the distribution of trigers seen so far.
The logic is as folows: in order to get to a value below 0.5 (more towards OV), significantly more unambiguous OV trigers must have been seen; in order to get to a value above 0.5 (more towards VO), significantly more unambiguous VO trigers must have been seen.
The individual acquisition algorithm used in the model is below: Initial value of VO access = 0.5 While in critical period Get a piece of input from the linguistic environment created by the rest of the population members.
If input is an unambiguous triger If input passes through Noise Filter Increase relevant batch counter If counter is at threshold Alter current VO access value Note that the final VO access value after the critical period is over does not have to be 0.0 or 1.0 – it may be a value in between.
It is suposed to reflect the distribution the child has heard, not necessarily be one of the extreme values.
4.3 Population
Model: Implementation Since individual acquisition drives the linguistic composition of the population, the population algorithm centers around the individual acquisition algorithm: Population age range = 0 to 60 Initial population size = 1800 6 Initialize members to starting VO access value 7 At 100 A.D. and every 2 years until 120 A.D.
Members age 59-60 die; the rest age 2 years New members age 0 to 1 created New members use individual acquisition algorithm to set their VO access value 6 Based on estimates from Koenigsberger & Brigs (1987).
7 Based
on historical corpus data.
6 4.4 Population Values from Historical Data We use the historical corpus data to initialize the average VO access value in the population at 100 A.D., calibrate the model between 100 and 150 A.D., and determine how strongly VO the distribution has to be by 120 A.D.
However, note that while the VO access value reflects the OV/VO distribution before interference from other parameters causes uterances to become ambiguous, the historical data reflects the distribution after this interference has caused uterances to become ambiguous.
Table 3 shows how much of the data from the historical corpus is comprised of ambiguous uterances.
Time Period D0 % Ambig D1 % Ambig 100 A.D. 76% 28% 100-150 A.D. 80% 25% 120 A.D. 71% 10% Table 3.
How much of the historical corpus is comprised of ambiguous uterances at various points in time.
We know that either OV or VO order was used to generate all these ambiguous uterances – so our job is to estimate how many of them were generated with the OV order and how many with the VO order.
This determines the “underlying” distribution.
Once we know this, we can determine what VO access value produced that underlying OV/VO distribution.
Folowing the process detailed in Pearl (205), we rely on the fact that the D0 distribution is more distorted than the D1 distribution (since the D0 distribution always has more ambiguous trigers).
The process itself involves using the difference in distortion between the D0 and D1 distribution to estimate the difference in distortion between the D1 and underlying distribution.
Once this is done, we have average VO access values for initialization, calibration, and the target.
Time A.D. 100 100-150 120 Avg VO .23 .31 .75 Table 4.
Average VO access value in the population at various points in time, based off historical corpus data.
Thus, to satisfy the historical facts, a population must start with an average VO access value of 0.23 at 100 A.D., reach an average VO access value of 0.31 between 100 and 150 A.D., and reach an average VO access value of 0.75 by 120 A.D. 5 Results 5.1 Sufficient Restrictions Figure 1 shows the average VO access value over time of an Old English population restricted to learn only from degree-0 unambiguous trigers.
These restrictions on acquisition seem sufficient to get the shift from a strongly OV distribution to a strongly VO distribution to occur at the right time.
We also note that the sharper population-level change emerges after a build-up of individual-level changes in a growing population.
Figure 1.
The trajectory of a population restricted to learn only from degree-0 unambiguous trigers.
Thus, we have empirical suport for the acquisition proposal since it can satisfy the language change constraints for Old English word order.
5.2 Necessary
Restrictions 5.2.1 Unambiguous Trigers We have shown these restrictions – to learn only from degree-0 unambiguous trigers are sufficient to get the job done.
But are they necessary?
We examine the “unambiguous” aspect first – can we stil satisfy the language change constraints if we don’t restrict ourselves to unambiguous trigers?
This is especially attractive since it may be resource-intensive to determine if 7 an uterance is unambiguous.
Instead, we might try simply using surface word order as a triger.
This would create many more trigers in the input for instance, a Subject Verb Object uterance would now be parsed as a VO triger.
Using this definition of triger, we get the folowing data from the historical corpus: D0 VO Advantage 100 A.D. 4.8% 100 – 150 A.D. 5.5% 120 A.D. 8.5% Table 5.
Advantage for the VO grammar in the degree-0 (D0) clauses at various times, based on data from the historical corpus.
The most salient problem with this is that even at the earliest point in time when the population is suposed to have a strongly OV distribution, it is the VO grammar – and not the OV grammar – that has a significant advantage in the degree-0 data.
A population learning from this data would be hardpressed to remain OV at 100 A.D., let alone between 100 and 150 A.D.
Thus, this definition of triger wil not suport the historical facts – we must keep the proposal which requires unambiguous trigers.
5.2.2 Degree-0 Data We turn now to the degree-0 data restriction.
Recall that the degree-1 data has a much higher OV advantage before 150 A.D.
(see Table 1).
It’s posible that if children heard enough degree-1 data, the population as a whole would remain OV to long and be unable to shift to a VO “enough” distribution by 120 A.D.
However, the average amount of degree-1 data available to children is about 16% of the input, based on estimates from modern English children’s input.
Is this small amount enough to keep the Old English population OV to long?
With our quantified model, we can determine if 16% degree-1 data causes our population to not be VO “enough” by 120 A.D.
Moreover, we can estimate what the threshold of permisible degree-1 data is so that the modeled Old English population can match the historical facts.
Figure 2 displays the average VO access value in 5 Old English populations exposed to different amounts of degree-1 data during acquisition.
As we can see, the population with 16% of the input comprised of degree-1 data is not able to match the historical facts and be VO “enough” by 120 A.D.
Only populations with 1% or less degree-1 data in the input can.
Figure 2: Average VO access values at 120 A.D. for populations with differing amount of degree-1 data available during acquisition.
This data suports the necessity of the degree-0 restriction since the amount of degree-1 data children hear on average during acquisition (~16%) is to much to allow the Old English population to shift at the right time.
6 Conclusions
Using a probabilistic model of individual acquisition to model a population’s language change, we demonstrate the sufficiency and necessity of certain restrictions on individual acquisition.
In this way, we provide empirical suport for a proposal about what data children are learning from for syntactic acquisition – the degree-0 unambiguous trigers.
Future work wil refine the individual acquisition model to explore the conection between the length of the critical period and the parameter in question, including more sophisticated techniques of Bayesian modeling (to replace the current mechanisms of Noise Filter and Batch Learner), and investigate what parameters must be considered to determine if a triger is “unambiguous”.
As well, we hope to test the degree-0 unambiguous triger restriction for other parameters with documented language change, such as the los of V2 movement in Midle English (Yang 203, Lightfoot 199, among others).
This type of language change modeling 8 may also be useful for testing proposals about what the crucial data is for phonological acquisition.
Acknowledgement I am immensely grateful to Amy Weinberg, Charles Yang, Garrett Mitchener, David Lightfoot, Norbert Hornstein, Stephen Crain, Rosalind Thornton, Tony Kroch, Beatrice Santorini, An Taylor, Susan Pintzuk, Philip Resnik, Cedric Boeckx, Partha Niyogi, Michelle Hugue, and the audiences of the 28 th PLC, DIGS VIII, ICEHL 13, the Cognitive Neuroscience of Language Lunch Talks, and the 203 Maryland Student Conference.
Their god questions, unwavering encouragement, and sensible advice were invaluable.
That I may have ignored some of it is my own fault.
This work is suported by an NSF Graduate Fellowship.
References Baker, M.
(201). The Atoms of Language: The Mind’s Hiden Rules of Gramar.
New York, NY: Basic Boks.
Baker, M.
(205). Maping the Terain of Language Learning.
Language Learning and Development, 1: 93-129.
Bock, J.
& A.
Kroch. 1989.
The Isolability of Syntactic Procesing.
In Linguistic Structure in Language Procesing . Edited by G.
Carlson and M.
Tanenhaus. Boston: Kluwer.
Chomsky, Noam.
(1981). Lectures on Government and Binding Theory.
Dordrecht: Foris.
Clark, Robin & Ian Roberts (193).
A computational model of language learnability and language change.
Linguistic Inquiry 24: 29-345.
Dresher, Elan.
(199). Charting the learning path: Cues to parameter seting.
Linguistic Inquiry, 30:27-67 Fodor, Janet D.
(198). Unambiguous Trigers.
Linguistic Inquiry, 29:1-36.
Gibson, Edward & Wexler, Keneth.
(194). Trigers.
Linguistic Inquiry, 25, 407-454.
Koenigsberger, H.G.
& Brigs, A.
(1987). Medieval Europe, 40-150.
Longman: New York.
Kroch, Anthony and Taylor, An.
(200). The PenHelsinki parsed corpus of Midle English.
Philadelphia: Department of Linguistics, University of Pensylvania, 2 nd edn.
Acesible via htp:/ww.ling.upen.edu/mideng Lightfot, David.
(191). How to set parameters.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Pres.
Lightfot, David.
(199). The Development of Language: Acquisition, Change, and Evolution.
Oxford: Blackwel.
MacWhiney, B.
& C.
Snow. (1985).
The Child Language Data Exchange System.
Journal of Child Language 12: 271-96.
Niyogi, Partha & Berwick, Robert C.
(195). The logical problem of language change.
AI-Memo 1516, Artificial Inteligence Laboratory, IT.
Niyogi, Partha & Berwick, Robert C.
(196). A language learning model for finite parameter spaces.
Cognition, 61, 161-193.
Niyogi, Partha & Berwick, Robert C.
(197). Evolutionary consequences of language learning.
Linguistics and Philosophy, 20, 697-719.
Pearl, Lisa.
(205). The Input to Syntactic Acquisition: Answer from Language Change Modeling.
Unpublished Manuscript, University of Maryland, Colege Park.
htp:/ww.am.umd.edu/~lsp/papers/InputSynAc q.pdf Pintzuk, Susan (202).
Verb-Object Order in Old English: Variation as Gramatical Competition.
Syntactic Efects of Morphological Change.
Oxford: Oxford University Pres.
Taylor, A., Warner, A., Pintzuk, S., and Beths, F.
(203). The York-Toronto-Helsinki parsed corpus of Old English.
York, UK: Department of Language and Linguistic Science, University of York.
Available through the Oxford Text Archive.
Yang, Charles.
(200). Internal and external forces in language change.
Language Variation and Change, 12: 231-250.
Yang, Charles.
(203). Knowledge and Learning in Natural Language.
Oxford: Oxford University Pres .

