Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related Formalisms, pages 49–56, Sydney, July 2006.
c©2006 Association for Computational Linguistics Negative Concord and Restructuring in Palestinian Arabic: A Comparison of TAG and CCG Analyses Frederick M.
Hoyt Linguistics Department University of Texas at Austin 1 University Station B5100 Austin, TX, USA 78712-0198 fmhoyt@mail.texas.edu Abstract This paper discusses interactions between negative concord and restructuring/clause union in Palestinian Arabic.
Analyses formulated in Tree Adjoining Grammar and Combinatorial Categorial Grammar are compared, with the conclusion that a perspicuous analysis of the the intricacies of the data requires aspects of both formalisms; in particular, the TAG notion of the extended domain of locality and the CCG notion of flexible constituency.
1 Palestinian
Arabic Negative Concord In Palestinian Arabic (PA), negative concord occurs with the determiner wEla “(not) even one,” where negative concord describes the failure of an expression which expresses negation in some sentences to do so in others.
Phrases formed with wEla (“wEla-phrases”) are interpreted either as negative quantifiers (“NQ-wEla)” or as polaritysensitive indefinites (“NPI-wEla”).
wEla-phrases have an NQ-interpretation preceding the finite verb or verb complex in a clause (1-2) or in fragment answers (3-4): (1) wEla not.even h˙ada one.MS fi:-hUm in-them ˇsæ:f-ni.
saw.3ms-me “Not even ONE of them saw me!” (2) wEla not.even yo:m day Qaˇgabni pleased.3ms-me l-Ekıl.
the-food “There wasn’t even one day the food pleased me!” (3) Q: ˇsu what k˙al-l-ak? said.3ms-to-you A: wEla not.even iˇsi.
thing “What did he say to you?
Nothing at all.” (4) Q: mi:n who ˇsUfti? saw.2fs A: wEla not.even s˙u:s˙ chick ıbn son yome:n.
two-days “Whodid you see?
Noteven atwo-day oldchick!” A preverbal wEla-phrase preceding a sentential negation marker causes the sentence to have a double-negation reading (5: compare with 2): (5) wEla not.even yo:m day ma-Qaˇgabni not-pleased.3ms-me l-Ekıl.
the-food “There wasn’t one day the food didn’t please me!” “The food pleased me every day.” NQ-wEla never occurs within the scope of negation but does occur in post-verbal positions which are not “thematically entailed” by the verb (6-7)1: (6) huwwa he wEla not.even iˇsi! thing “He is NOTHING!” (7) hiyya she ma˙gru:ra conceited.fs Qala upon wEla not.even iˇsi.
thing “She is conceited for absolutely NO reason!” The NPI-interpretation is only available within the scope of antimorphic operators (Zwarts, 1993), like sentential negation or bıdu:n “without” (8-9): (8) tılıQti left.2fs bıdu:n-ma without-that tk˙u:li say.2fs wEla even iˇsi.
thing “You left without saying even one thing!” (9) la-s-sEnna to-the-year ma-baQt˙i:-hUm not-give.1s-them wElla even lUk˙mi bite Ekl.
food “Up to a year I don’t give them even a bite of [solid] food.” More than one wEla-phrase can have the NPIinterpretation at a time: (10) ma-k˙Ult not-said.1s wEla even iˇsi thing wEla to-even la-h˙ada one fi:-hUm.
in-them “I didn’t give anything at all to even one of them.” It follows from the distributions of NQand NPIwEla that wEla-phrases are blocked from postverbal argument positions which are thematically entailed and which are not within the scope of an antimorphic operator.
1Following (Herburger, 2001), “thematically entailed” means that the meaning of the verb entails the existence of an entity filling the thematic role in question.
49 1.1 Negative Concord and Locality PA negative concord is generally subject to strict locality constraints: a wEla-phrase must be contained within the smallest inflected clause containing its licensor.
It cannot be separated from its licensor by the boundary of either an indicative (11) or a subjunctive/irrealis (12) complement: (11) * ma-waQatt not-promised.1s [ Eh˙ki talk wEla even maQ with h˙ada one fi:-hUm in-them ].
(12) * batwak˙k˙aQ-ıˇs believe.1s-neg [ ınnhæ that.3fs bıth˙ıbb likes.3fs wEla even h˙ada one ].
Similar sentences with weaker polarity items such as h˙ada or Paiy h˙ada “anyone” are acceptable: (13) ma-waQatt not-promised.1s Eh˙ki talk maQ with ( Paiy any ) h˙ada one fi:-hUm.
in-them “I didn’t promise to talk with any of them.” (14) batwak˙k˙aQ-ıˇs believe.1s-neg ınnhæ that.3fs bıth˙ıbb likes.3fs ( Paiy any ) h˙ada.
one “I don’t think that she likes ANY one.” This suggests that negative concord is a strictly bounded dependency like agreement marking, argument realization, or reflexive binding.
However, there are exceptions to this generalization.
“Long-distance” negative concord is possible between a matrix negation morpheme and wEla-phrases inside the complements of a small class of verbs, including bıdd“want” (15), Xalla “to allow” (16), h˙a:wal “to try” (17, 25 below) or Qırıf “to know how to, to be able to” (18 below): (15) ma-bıddna not-want.1s nXalli leave.1p wEla even zElami.
fellow “We don’t want to leave even one man.” (16) ma-Xallu:-ni:-ˇs not-allowed.3mp-me-neg æ:kOl eat.1s wEla even lUk˙mi bite “They wouldn’t let me eat even one bite!” The embedding can be recursive, provided that only verbs in this class are used (17).
(17) bıddi:-ˇs want.1s-neg ah˙a:wıl try.1s Eh˙ki speak.1s wEla even maQ with h˙ada.
one “I don’t want try to talk with anyone at all.” These verbs correspond to verbs found in many other languages which trigger a process often referred to as restructuring or clause union.
I follow (Aissen and Perlmutter, 1983) in calling them trigger verbs.
Restructuring involves the “stretching” of the domain of locality for certain kinds of bounded dependencies from the complement of a trigger verb to include the clause that it heads.
At present no other phenomena have been identified in PA which independently confirm that it has restructuring.
However, long-distance negative concord is identified as a restructuring phenomenon in several languages such as West Flemish (Haegeman and Zanuttini, 1996), Polish (Dziwirek, 1998), and Serbian (Progovac, 2000).
As such, I assume for now that long-distance negative concord in PA is a form of restructuring as well.
2 A
TAG Analysis Restructuring involves a seeming paradox involving a dependency which is non-local in the hierarchical structure of a sentence but local in its semantics.
TreeAdjoining Grammarsare wellsuited for analyzing restructuring because the distinction betweenaderived tree andthe derivation tree associated with it provides two notions of locality.
Restructuring phenomena which have been analyzed with TAGs include clitic-climbing in Spanish and Italian (Bleam, 2000; Kulick, 2000), long-distance scrambling in German (Rambow, 1994), and longdistance agreement inTsez (Frank, 2006).
It therefore is natural to explore a TAG analysis for longdistance negative concord in PA.
To illustrate with a simple example, the negative concord dependency in (18) is licensed within an initial tree headed by Ektıb “write,” and is then “stretched” by adjunction of the auxiliary tree headed by Qırıft “I was able to” (19): (18) ma-Qırıft not-knew.1s Ektıb write.1s wEla even kılmi.
word “I wasn’t able to write even one word.” (19) β:IP00 δ:IP ma:IP* β:IP00 γ:IP Qırıft IP* β:IP00 Ektıb NP↓02 α:NP wEla kılmi The locality constraint on negative concord can then be expressed as a generalization about the derivation tree (20): a wEla-phrase and its licensor must be sisters: (20) β α(02) γ(00) δ(00) However, several properties of negative concord in PA preclude a simple analysis like this.
50 2.1 Clause-local Dependencies The first property is the domain of locality of the negative concord dependency.
In a simple TAG, syntactic dependencies are licensed within an elementary tree: they are tree-local.
However, negative concord in PA is clause-local, because wElaphrases are not licensed within the immediate tree to which they are attached, but instead within the immediate clausal tree containing them.
For example, wEla-phrases can be inside prepositional phrases attached to a negative clause (21-22): (21) ma-kaQatt not-sat.1s [PP ˇganıb next.to wEla even h˙ada one fi:-hUm in-them ] “I didn’t sit next to even one of them.” (22) bıtXallıfu:-ˇs disagree.2mp-neg Qan-na from-us [PP bi-wEla with-even iˇsi thing ].
“You don’t disagree with us about even one thing.” In a simple TAG analysis, the wEla-phrase first substitutes into the initial tree headed by the preposition, which is then attached to the clausal tree.
The relationship between the wEla-phrase and its licensor would therefore not be tree-local.
Clause-locality can be modeled with what I refer to as “Scope TAG” (Kallmeyer and Joshi, 2003), a multi-component TAG (MC-TAG) in which quantificational NPsare tree sets containing two parts: a “defective” auxiliary tree IP* which specifies the scope of the quantifier, and an NPtree which specifies its restriction.
I refer to such tree sets as “scope sets.” While Kallmeyer & Joshi’s proposal is intended to capture the semantic scope of quantifiers, it can alsobe used toexpress clause locality byassigning PPs to scope sets as well, and by stipulating that scope sets can combine with each other by means of set-local adjunction.
TheIP*-node inthe scopeset of a wEla-phrase can then adjoin to the IP*node in the PP scope set, which in turn adjoins to the IP-node of the initial tree.
For example, (21) above can be analyzed with the elementary trees in (23) (trees are in abbreviated form), producing the derivation tree in (24): (23) a.
α : braceleftBigg α 1 : IP*, α2 : NP wEla h˙ada bracerightBigg b.
γ : braceleftBigg γ 1 : IP*00, γ2 : PP ˇgænıb NP↓02 bracerightBigg c.
δ: IP ma:IP* β: IP00 I kaQatt PP↓02 (24) β γ1(00) α1(00) δ(00) γ2(02) α2(02) However, given (24) it is still not possible to state a generalization about negative concord locality in terms of sisterhood in the derivation tree.
This can be remedied by adopting the “nodesharing” relation proposed by (Kallmeyer, 2005).
Informally, two nodes α and β are in a nodesharing relation in a derivation tree T iff they are either in a mother-daughter relation in T at a node address A, or there is a sequence S of nodes N1...Nn which is the transitive closure of a mother-daughter relation in T in which the node pairs are related in terms of the root node or foot node in an auxiliary tree.
On this basis, the negative concord locality generalization is that a wEla-phrase and its licensor are “shared-node sisters” in the derivation tree, where shared-node sisters are two nodes A and B which are each in a shared-node relation with a single node C.
For example, in (24) β is a sharednode parent of both α1 and δ.
Accordingly, α1 and δ are shared-node sisters with respect to β.
2.2 Trigger
Verbs and Complement Type The second property of PA long-distance negative concord that complicates a TAG analysis has to do with the kinds of complement that they take.
TAG approaches to restructuring exploit “reduced complement” analyses in which trigger verbs take “smaller” complements than other kinds of subordinating verbs do (Bleam, 2000; Kulick, 2000).
However, PA trigger verbs are mixed in terms of the types of complements they take: h˙a:wal “try to” or k˙ıdır “be able to” optionally allow a complementizer Pınn(25-26), while bıdd“want” or Qırıf “know to, be able to” exclude it (27-28): (25) ma-h˙a:walt not-tried.1s ( ınni that.1s ) Eh˙ki speak.1s wEla even maQ with h˙ada.
one “I didn’t try to talk with even one of them.” (26) ma-k˙ıdırt not-could.1s ( ınni that.1s ) Eh˙ki speak.1s wEla even maQ with h˙ada.
one “I wasn’t able to speak with even one of them.” (27) ma-bıdd-i:-ıˇs not-want.1s-neg ( *ınni that.1s ) aˇsu:f see.1s wEla even h˙ada.
one “I don’t want to see even ONE of them.” (28) ma-Qırıft not-knww.1s ( *ınni that.1s ) Ektıb write.1s wEla even kılmi.
word “I wan’t able to write even one word.” 51 Assuming that the presence of a complementizer indicates a CP category, and that the presence of agreement marking onthe verb indicates anIP category, what these data show is that some trigger verbs allow either CP or IP complements, while others allow only IP complements.
It follows that complement category cannot be exploited as away todistinguish trigger verbs from non-trigger verbs.
This is an essential distinction because restructuring is not the only phenomenon which involves adjunction.
For example, long-distance Adependencies are analyzed in TAG as involving adjunction of auxiliary trees.
(29-30) show that the same verbs which block long-distance negative concord allow long-distance A-dependencies, indicating that theymust alsobe analyzed as auxiliary trees.
Moreover, (30) can include the complementizer Pınn-, indicating that it takes the same kinds of complements as do trigger verbs like k˙ıdır “be able” and h˙a:wal “try”: (29) mi:n who bıtıtwak˙k˙aQ believe.2ms yah˙sal get.3ms Qala upon kæ:s cup ıl-Qæ:lım? the-world “Who do you think will get the World Cup?” (30) ˇsu what waQatt promised.2ms ( ınnak that.2ms ) taQt˙i:-hæ? give.2ms-her “What did you promise to give her?” A failure to distinguish between trigger verbs and non-trigger verbs will over-predict the availability of long-distance negative concord.
To make this distinction, I use Dowty’s (Dowty, 1994) analysis of negative concord licensing.
Dowty models negative concord with a “polarity” feature whichtakes “+” or“-” values.
Whenanegative concord item combines with a clausal category it specifies (by unification) the clause as having a negative value for this feature.
In addition, Dowty assumes that root clauses must have a positive value for the feature: I refer to this as the root clause polarity constraint.
Negation morphemes (as well as bıdu:n “without”) take a complement specified as POLand return a constituent with a POL+ feature.
A root clause containing a negative concord item and lacking a negation morpheme will have a POLfeature for its root node and violate the root clause polarity constraint.
This derives the requirement that wEla phrases in root clauses be “roofed” by a negation morpheme.
Turning to long-distance negative concord, trigger verbs can be distinguished from non-trigger verbs by stipulating that non-trigger verbs take POL+ complements, while trigger verbs (and auxiliary verbs) impose no polarity specification and instead inherit the polarity feature withwhichtheir complement is specified2.
An analysis of this kind applied to (18) would result in a derived tree (32) which satisfies the root clause polarity constraint.
(31) β:IP IPPOL+ ma:IP*POLγ:IP Qırıft IP* α1:IP*POLβ:IP Ektıb NP↓ α2:NP wEla kılmi (32) IPPOL+ ma:IPPOLQırıft IP*POLEktıb NP↓ wEla kılmi 2.3 Negation Morphology The last property of long-distance negative concord sentences to be dealt with has to do with negation morphology inPA.Negation is expressed with some combination of the proclitic ma:and the enclitic -š.
-š appears to be a second-position attaching to the first word-sized constituent in the stringproduced byanIP-constituent, provided that the word contains a morpheme expressing person features (Awwad, 1987; Eid, 1993).
The most frequent distribution has -š attached to the leftmost verb stem in a clause, which may be the main verb in a mono-verbal predicate (33), or to the leftmost auxiliary in a clause with compound tense-aspect-mood marking (34-35): (33) ma-nımt-ıˇs not-slept.1s-neg fi-l-le:l.
in-the-night “I didn’t sleep last night.” (34) ma-kUnt-ıˇs not-was.1s-neg Qa:rıf know.actpart.ms we:n where ah˙Ut˙t˙-u.
put.1s-it “I didn’t know where to put it.” (35) ma-Qad-ˇs not-returned.3ms-neg k˙al-l-i said.3ms-to-me Pınnu that.3ms ˇstara bought.3ms sayya:ra.
car “He didn’t tell me anymore that he bought a car.” 2This is similar to Frank’s (Frank, 2006) proposal for analyzing long-distance agreement in Tsez.
52 In other kinds of sentences, -š attaches to a variety of non-verbal expressions, including the indefinite pronoun h˙ada “(any)one” (36), the existential particle fi: (37), inflected prepositions (38), and the adverb QUmr “ever” (39): (36) ma-h˙ada:-ˇs not-one.ms-neg kæ:n was.3ms yıQˇgır-na.
rent.3ms-us “No one would rent to us.” (37) ma-fıˇs-ˇs not-exist-neg fi-d-dınya in-the-word mıþıl-hın.
like-them.fp “There isn’t [anything] in the world like them.” (38) bæk˙i:-l-E was.3ms-to-him faras mare ma-lhæ:-ˇs not-to-her-neg UXt.
sister “He had a mare [that was] without compare.” (39) fi: exist næ:s people.3fs ma-QUmr-hæ:-ˇs not-age-3fs-neg h˙at˙t˙at put.3fs mawd˙u:Q subject fi-l-mUntada.
in-the-club “There are people who have never posted a thread on almontada.com.” What these expressions all have in common with verb stems is that they occur as the first constituent in the clause and that they all contain a morpheme expressing person features.
It follows that -š is constrained to occur in the second position attached to a word that is inflected for person.
The cases in which -š attaches to a verb can be modeled by assuming that ma:and -š are part of a tree set and that -š adjoins to right of an I-node: (40) braceleftBigg δ 1 : IP ma:IP*, δ2 : I I -š bracerightBigg (41) IP IP ma:IP* IP I PP fi-l-le:l I I* -š I nımt The cases with -š attached to a non-verbal expression require a second analysis.
One possibility is to assume a second tree for -š like the first, except with -špreceding the foot node.
This requires stipulating a morphological output filter that affixes -š tothe preceding word and blocks use ofδ2 in(40): (42) braceleftBigg δ 1 : IP ma:IP*, δ2 : I -š I bracerightBigg (43) IP IP ma:IP* IP NP h˙ada I I VP yıQˇgırna I -š I* I kæ:n This is still not adaquate for (35), in which -š is attached to a “serial auxiliary” (Hussein, 1990), one of a small set of verb stems which function as aspectual adverbs and which “agree” with the main verb in aspectual form and agreement marking.
Serial auxiliaries are plausibly analyzed as adverbial IP-auxiliary trees as in (44): (44) IP I Qad IP* IP IP I k˙al-l-i CP↓ The structure resulting from (44) has two I-nodes, and another constraint would have to be stipulated forcing -š to adjoin to the leftmost of the two.
To sum up, a TAG analysis can be formulated for PA long-distance negative concord which allows the locality of negative concord licensing to be stated as a generalization about shared-node derivation trees.
However, the analysis requires brute force stipulations to capture the morphological expression of negation in PA negative sentences.
Moreover, the TAG analysis does not provide a way to express the simple morphological generalization that -š falls in the second position in the string generated by the clause.
3 A
CCG Analysis The TAG analysis has difficulty accommodating the distribution of -š because TAG trees are phrase structures, making it difficult to state constraints on strings of words rather than on hierarchical structure.
Categorial Grammar, on the other hand, is a string calculus, and its operations result in string concatenation rather than structure expansion.
For this reason, a CG can be constrained to not generate particular kinds of strings, rather than 53 particular trees.
A CG therefore provides a way to state constraints on the distribution of -š more directly than a phrase-structure grammar does.
I assume a Combinatory Categorial Grammar (Steedman, 1996; Steedman, 2000b; Baldridge, 2002).
The basis of the CCG analysis is that npI-wEla-phrases are treated as type-raised categories which look for an s category to their left.
I continue following Dowty in assuming the root clause polarity principle and in assuming that wEla-phrases specify a POLfeature on the s-headed category that they combine with.
NQ-wElaphrases, on the other hand, are treated as negative quantifiers which look for their s-headed argument to the right: (45) NQ-wEla :(Spol+$/(Spol+\$/NP))/NP : λPλQ.∃x[P(x) & Q(x)] (46) NPI-wEla :(Spol−$\(Spol−$/NP))/NP : λPλQ.¬∃x[P(x) & Q(x)] The negation morphemes are treated as follows (-š is semantically vacuous): (47) ma::Spol+$/Spol−$ : λPst.¬P(e) (48) -š :Spol−$\×Spol±$ Verbs have the following types3: (49) šUft :S\NP/NP : λy.λx.[x saw y] (50) h˙a:walt :S\NP/(s\NP) : λx.λPst.[x tries P(x)] The -š morpheme fixes a clause with a POLfeature, while ma:takes the POLclausal category and changes its value for the polarity feature to POL+, satisfying the root clause polarity constraint.
This works much as the TAG analysis did.
The slash in the type for -š is marked with the “crossed composition” modality.
This allows -š to combine withapreceding s-headed category while returning a category looking for its arguments to the right (Figures 1-2)4.
Turning to long-distance negative concord, a CCG analysis, like the TAG analysis above, has to account for the distinction between trigger verbs and non-trigger verbs.
The CCG analog of auxiliary-tree adjunction is function composition.
The long-distance negative concord dependency therefore involves a specific kind of composition subject to stricter constraints than is the more general kind which produces A-dependencies.
In order to model this, I adapt Hepple’s (Hepple, 1990) approach tomodeling island constraints 3The type assignments ignore the representation of VS word order and pro-drop sentences.
4Logical forms are surpressed in the derivations.
in Categorial Type Logic.
In brief, Hepple’s approach is to assign unary modalities to the arguments of clausal categories (such as subordinating verbs or relative pronouns) as well as to the nominal argument of a type-raised extracted category (such as a question word or topicalized noun phrase).
The former are referred to as “bounding modalities,” and the latter as “penetrative modalities.” Interaction axioms require the penetrative modality of an extraction category to be compatible with the bounding category of its argument in terms of a type hierarchy defined over modalities.
The unary modalities in CTL can be duplicated in CCG as features on category labels, so to approximate Hepple’s proposal, I define a feature hierarchy as follows: (51) h g c Each pair of sisters in the hierarchy consists of a “penetrative feature” and the “bounding feature” which blocks it (following Hepple’s terminology).
The feature c is an penetrative feature which is blocked by the g feature, and h is the most general or permissive bounding feature.
The idea is that categories which participate in restructuring dependencies are marked with the c penetrative feature, which is spread across all the arguments of a complex type: (52) wEla h˙ada :Sc$\(Sc$/NPc) Trigger verbs impose the h bounding feature on their complements, while non-trigger embedding verbs impose the g feature: (53) bıdd“want,” Qırıf “be able to,” h˙a:wal “try to” :S\NP/(Sh\NPh) (54) waQad-yu:Qıd “promise to” :S\NP/(Sg\NPg) According to (51), categories marked with feature h are compatible with categories marked with feature c, while categories marked with feature g clash with it.
The clash between g and c expresses the restriction on restructuring dependencies.
For example, in an analysis of (18), wEla kılmi applies to the composed constituent, Qırıft Ektıb.
This is possible because the penetrative feature c on the wEla-phrase is compatible with the h bounding feature which Qırıft passes to its complement (Figure 3).
Long-distance negative concord is blocked in two ways.
A wide-scope derivation (in which the wEla-phrase combines with the composition of the 54 matrix and embedded verbs) is blocked by a feature clash between the g and c features (Figure 4).
A narrow scope derivation (in which the wElaphrase combines with the embedded verb only) is blocked because of a resulting clash in polarity features between the embedded clause and the matrix verb (Figure 5).
4 Comparison
and Discussion While the TAG analysis imposes certain limitations on the ordering of morphemes, it does provide a very simple and intuitive way to describe restructuring verbs as a natural class that includes auxiliary verbs, the other kinds of verb stems which are “transparent” to negative concord.
In contrast, The CCG analysis has a technical flavor, and it is not clear to what extent it reflects a linguistic intuition.
The CCG analysis does, however, capture the distribution of the negation morphemes in PA.
It would therefore be interesting to explore further whether the Hepple-style feature/modality approach could be associated with some linguistic phenomenon.
One interesting possibility would be to use Steedman’s theory of intonation (Steedman, 2000a) to explore the prosodic properties of restructuring sentences in Arabic (and in other languages) to see whether the availability of restructuring correlates with certain prosodic properties.
There has been very little study of sentential intonation in Arabic, and so very little empirical basis for an investigation.
However, should such an investigation bear fruit, it might suggest that Hepple’s approach to extraction constraints could be recast as a theory of intonation.
This would allow powerful generalizations to be stated relating the prosodic properties of sentences in PA and other languages to their syntactic properties.
References Judith Aissen and David Perlmutter.
1983. Clause reduction in spanish.
In Studies in Relational Grammar.
University of Chicago Press.
Mohammad Amin Awwad.
1987. Free and bound pronouns as verbs in rural palestinian colloquial arabic.
Journal of Arabic Linguistics, 16:108–118.
Jason Baldridge.
2002. Lexically Specified Derivational Control in Combinatory Categorial Grammar.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh.
Tonia Bleam.
2000. Clitic climbing and the power of tree adjoining grammar.
In Anne Abeillé and Owen Rambow, editors, Tree Adjoining Grammar: Formalism, Implementation, and Linguistic Analysis.
CSLI (Stanford).
David Dowty.
1994. The role of negative polarity and concord marking in natural language reasoning.
In Mandy Harvey and Lynn Santelmann, editors, Proceedings from Semantics and Linguistic Theory IV, pages 114–144, Ithaca, New York.
Cornell University.
Katarzyna Dziwirek.
1998. Reduced constructions in universal grammar: Evidence from the polish object control construction.
Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 16:53–99.
Mushira Eid.
1993. Negation and predicate heads in arabic.
In Mushira Eid and Gregory Iverson, editors, Principles and Predication: The Analysis of Natural Language, pages 135–152.
John Benjamins (Philadelphia).
Robert Frank.
2006. Phase theory and tree adjoining grammar.
Lingua, 116:145–202.
Liliane Haegeman and Raffaella Zanuttini.
1996. Negative concord in west flemish.
In Adriana Belleti and Luigi Rizzi, editors, Parameters and Functional Heads, pages 117–179.
Oxford University Press.
Mark Hepple.
1990. The Grammar and Processing of Order and Dependency: A Categorial Approach.
Phd, University of Edinburgh.
Elena Herburger.
2001. Negative concord revisited.
Natural Language Semantics, pages 289–333.
Lutfi Hussein.
1990. Serial verbs in colloquial arabic.
In B.
D. Joseph and A.
M. Zwicky, editors, When Verbs Collide: Papers fromthe1990 Ohio StateMini-Conference on Serial Verbs, pages 340–354.
The Ohio State University.
Laura Kallmeyer and Aravind Joshi.
2003. Factoring predicate argumenta and scope semantics: Underspecified semantics with ltag.
Research on Language and Computation, 1:3–58.
Laura Kallmeyer.
2005. Tree-local multicomponent tree adjoining grammars with shared nodes.
Computational Linguistics, 31(2):187–225.
Seth Kulick.
2000. Constraining Non-Local Dependencies in Tree Adjoining Grammar: Computational and Linguistic Perspectives.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Ljiljana Progovac.
2000. Coordination, c-command and ‘logophoric’ n-words.
In Laurence Horn and Yasuhiko Kato, editors, Negation and Polarity: Syntactic and Semantic Perspectives, pages 88–114.
Oxford University Press (Oxford).
Owen Rambow.
1994. Formal and Computational Aspects of Natural Language Syntax.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania.
Mark Steedman.
1996. Surface Structure and Interpretation.
MIT Press.
Mark Steedman.
2000a. Information structure and the syntax-phonology interface.
Linguistic Inquiry, 31:649– 689.
Mark Steedman.
2000b. The Syntactic Process.
MIT Press.
Frans Zwarts.
1993. Three types of polarity items.
In F.
Hamm and E.
Hinrichs, editors, Semantics .

