ProjectingPOStagsandsyntacticdependenciesfromEnglishandFrench toPolishinalignedcorpora SylwiaOzdowska ERSS-CNRS&UniversitéToulouse-leMirail MaisondelaRecherche 5alléesAntonioMachado F-31058ToulouseCedex9 ozdowska@univ-tlse2.fr Abstract Thispaperpresentsthefirststeptoproject POS tags and dependencies from English and French to Polish in aligned corpora.
Both the English and French parts of the corpus are analysed with a POS tagger and a robust parser.
The English/Polish bi-text and the French/Polish bi-text are then aligned at the word level with the GIZA++ package.
The intersection of IBM-4 Viterbi alignments for both translation directions is used to project the annotationsfromEnglishandFrenchtoPolish.
The results show that the precision of direct projection vary according to the type of induced annotations as well as the source language.
Moreover, the performancesarelikelytobeimprovedbydefining regular conversion rules among POS tagsanddependencies.
1 Introduction
A clear imbalance may be observed between languages, such as English or French, for which a numberofNLPtoolsaswellasdifferentlinguistic resourcesexist(Leech,1997)andthoseforwhich they are sparse or even absent, such as Polish.
One possible option to enrich resource-poor languages consists in taking advantage of resourcerich/resource-poorlanguagealignedcorporatoinduce linguistic information for the resource-poor side from the resource-rich side (Yarowski et al., 2001; Borin, 2002; Hwa et al., 2002).
For Polish, this has been made possible on account of its accessing to the European Union (EU) which has resultedintheconstructionofalargemultilingual corpusofEUlegislativetextsandagrowinginterestfornewMemberStateslanguages.
This paper presents a direct projection of various morpho-syntactic informations from English and French to Polish.
First, a short survey of related works is made in order to motivate the issuesaddressedinthisstudy.
Then,theprincipleof annotation projection is explained and the framework of the experiment is decribed (corpus, POS tagging and parsing, word alignment).
The results of applying the annotation projection principlefromtwodifferentsourcelanguagesarefinally presentedanddiscussed.
2 Background
Yarowski, Ngai and Wicentowski (2001) have used annotation projection from English in order toinducestatisticalNLPtoolsforinstanceforChinese, Czech, Spanish and French.
Different kinds of analysis were produced: POS tagging, noun phrase bracketing, named entity tagging and inflectionalmorphologicalanalysis,andreliedonto trainstatisticaltoolsforeachtask.
Theauthorsreport that training allows to overcome the problem of erroneous and incomplete word alignment thus improvingtheaccuracyascomparedtodirectprojection: 96%forcorePOStagsinFrench.
The study proposed by Hwa, Resnik, Weinberg andKolak(2002)aimsatquantifyingthedegreeto whichsyntacticdependenciesarepreservedinEnglish/Chinese aligned corpora.
Syntactic relationshipsareprojectedtoChineseeitherdirectlyorusingelementarytransformationruleswhichleadsto 68%precisionandabout66%recall.
Finally, Borin (2002) has tested the projection of major POS tags and associated grammatical informations (number, case, person, etc).
from 53 Swedish to German.
95% precision has been obtained for major POS tags 1 whereas associated grammatical informations have turned out not to be applicable across the studied languages.
A rough comparison has been made between Swedish, German and additional languages (Polish, English and Finnish).
It tends to show that it should be possible to derive indirect yet regular POScorrespondences,atleastacrossfairlysimilar languages.
The projection from French and English to Polish presented in this paper is basically a direct one.
It concerns different linguistic informations: POStagsandassociatedgrammaticalinformation as well as syntactic dependencies.
Regarding the works mentioned above, uneven results are expected depending on the type of annotations induced.
This is the first point this study considers.
The second one is to identify regularity in rendering some French or English POS tags or dependencieswithsomePolishones.
Finally,theideais totestiftheresultsvarysignificantlywithrespect tothesourcelanguageusedfortheinduction.
3 Projectingmorpho-syntactic annotations Wetakeasthestartingpointofannotationprojection the direct correspondence assumption as formulated in (Hwa et al., 2002): “fortwo sentences in parallel translation, the syntactic relationships in one language directly map the syntactic relationships in the other”, and extend it to POS tags as well.
The general principle of annotation projectioninalignedcorporamaybeexplainedasfollows: iftwowordsw1andw2aretranslationequivalents within aligned sentences, the morphosyntactic informations associated to w1 are assignedtow2 In this study, the projected annotations are POS tags, with gender and number subcategories for nouns and adjectives, on one hand, and syntactic dependenciesontheotherhand.
Let us take the example of Commission and Komisja, respectivelyw1 i andw2 m, two aligned words (figure 1).
In accordance with the annotation projection principle,Komisjaisfirst assigned the POSN (noun) as well as the information on itsnumber,sg(singular),andgenderf (feminine).
1 Assessedoncorrectalignments.
Furthermore, the dependencies connectingw1 i to other wordsw1 j are examined.
Foreachw1 j,if thereisanalignmentlinkingw1 j andw2 n,thedependency identified betweenw1 i andw2 j is projected tow2 m andw2 n. For example, the noun Commission (w1 i ) is syntactically connected to theverbadopte(w1 j )through thesubjectrelation andadopteis aligned toprzyjmuje(w2 n ).
Therefore,itispossibletoinduceadependencyrelation, namelyasubjectone,betweenKomisja(w2 m )and przyjmuje(w2 n ) 2 . Nfsg Nfsg subj Komisja przyjmuje roczny program La Commission adopte un programme annuel V V NmsgDET ADJmsg ADJmsg Nmsg DET subj Figure 1: Projection of POS tags and dependenciesfromFrenchtoPolish The induced dependencies are given the same label as the source dependencies that is to say that thenounKomisjaandtheverbprzyjmujeareconnected through the subject relation.
Moreover, in this preliminary study, the projection is basically limitedtocaseswherethereisexactlyonerelation goingfromw1 i andw1 j ontheonehand,andfrom w2 m andw2 n on the other hand.
Thus, as shown in figure 2, the relation connecting Komisjaand przyjmujecouldnotbeinducedfromEnglishsince Commissionandadaptare not linked directly but bymeansofthemodalshall.
AUX ADJ ADJ N DET DET auxsubj N NV V Komisja przyjmuje roczny program N The Commission shall adopt an annual program Figure 2: Projection of POS tags and dependenciesfromEnglishtoPolish 2 The POS and the additional grammatical informations available are also projected from the verb adopte to przyjmuje.
54 The only exception concerns the complement and prepositional complement relations.
Indeed, Polish is a highly inflected language which means that: 1) word order is less constrained than in FrenchandEnglish2)syntacticrelationsbetween wordsareindicatedbythecase.
Thisisthereason why, going back to figure 1, the projection from the nouns programme and travail, linked by the prepositionde, results in the induction of a relationbetweenthenounsprogramandpracy.
4 Experimentalframework
4.1 Bi-texts The countries wishing to join the EU have first to approve theAcquisCommunautaire.TheAcquis communautaireencompasses the core EU law, its resolutions and declarations as well as the common aims pursued since its creation in the 1950s.
It comprises about 8,000 documents that have been translated and published by official institutions 3 thus ensuring a high quality of translation.
EachlanguageversionoftheAcquisisconsidered semantically equivalent to the others and legally binding.
This collection of documents is made availableonEurope’swebsite 4 . TheACcorpusismadeofapartoftheAcquistexts in 20 languages 5, and in particular the languages of the new Member States 6 . It has been collected and aligned at the sentence level by the Language Technology team at the Joint Research Centre working for the European Commision 7 (Erjavec et al., 2005; Pouliquen and Steinberger, 2005).
It is one of the largest parallel corpus regarding its size 8 and the number of different languages it covers.
A portion of the English, French and Polish parts form the multilingual parallel corpus selected for this study.
Table 1 gives the main featuresofeachpartofthecorpus.
3 OnlyEuropeanCommunitylegislationprintedinthepapereditionoftheOfficialJournaloftheEuropeanUnionis
deemedauthentic.
4 http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/lex 5 German, English, Danish, Spanish, Estonian, Finish, French,Greek,Hungarian,Italian,Latvian,Lithuanian,Maltese, Deutch, Polish, Portugese, Slovak, Slovene, Swedish andCzech.
6 In
2004, the EU welcomed ten new Member States: Cyprus,Estonia,Hungary,Latvia,Lithuania,Malta,Poland, CzechRepublic,Slovakia,Slovenia.
7 http://www.jrc.cec.eu.int/langtech/index.html 8 Thenumberofwordformsgoesfrom6upto13million according to the language.
The parts corresponding to the languagesofthenewMemberStatesrangefrom6upto10 million word forms as compared to 10 up to 13 million for English French Polish wordforms 562,458 809,036 764,684 sentences 52,432 Table 1: AC – the English/French/Polish parallel corpus 4.2 Bi-textprocessing 4.2.1 POStagging Both the English and French parts of the corpus have been POS tagged and parsed.
The POS tagging has been performed using the TreeTagger (Schmidt,1994).
Amongthemorpho-syntacticinformations provided by the TreeTagger’s tagset, onlythemaindistinctionsarekeptforfurtheranalysis: noun,verb,presentparticiple,adjective,past participle, adverb, pronoun and conjunction (coordination and subordination).
Nouns, adjectives and past participles are assigned data related to their number and gender and verbs are assigned information on voice, gender and form (infinitive or not), if available (table 2).
The TreeTagger’s output is given as input to the parser after a postprocessing stage which modifies the tokenization.
Some multi-word units are conflated (for example complex prepositions such as inaccordance with,aswellasforEnglish,conformémentà,sous formedeforFrench,adverbslikeinparticular,at least,enparticulier,aumoins,orevenverbsprendreenconsidération,avoirrecours).
4.2.2 Parsing
Each post-processed POS-tagged corpus is analysed with a deep and robust dependency parser: SYNTEX(FabreandBourigault, 2001; Bourigault et al., fothcoming).
For each sentence, SYNTEX identifies syntactic relations between words such as subject (SUBJ), object (OBJ), prepositional modifier (PMOD), prepositional complement (PCOMP), modifier (MOD), etc.
Both versions of the parser are being developed according to the same procedure and architecture.
The outputs are quite homogeneous in both languages since the dependencies are identified and representedinthesameway,thusallowingthecomparisionofannotationsinducedfromeitherFrenchor English.
Table2givessomeexamplesofthebasic relationstakenintoaccountaswellasthetagsassigned to the syntactically connected words.
The thelanguagesofthe“pre-enlargement”EU.
55 parts of speech are in upper case (N represents a noun,Vaverb,etc).
andthegrammaticalinformation(number,gender)isinlowercase(sgreprents thesingular,pltheplural,fthefeminineandmthe masculine).
(the)Regulation_Nsg SUBJ ←− establishes_Vsg (le)règlement_Nmsg SUBJ ←− détermine_Vsg covering_PPR OBJ −→ placing_PPR PMOD −→ on_PREP PCOMP −→ (the)market_Nsg (qui)régissent_Vpl OBJ −→ (la)mise_Nfsg PMOD −→ sur_PREP PCOMP −→ (le)marché_Nmsg further_ADJ MOD ←− calls_Npl appels_Nmpl MOD −→ supplémentaires_ADJpl (the)Member_Nsg MOD ←− States_Npl (les)États_Nmpl MOD −→ Membres_Nmpl (thedebates)clearly_ADV MOD ←− illustrate_Vpl (lesdébats)montrent_Vpl MOD −→ clairement_ADV (placingon)the_DET DET ←− market_Nsg la_DET DET ←− mise(sur)le_DET DET ←− marché_Nmsg Table 2: Syntactic dependencies identified with SYNTEX 4.2.3 Wordalignment The English/Polish parts of the corpus on the one hand, and the French/Polish parts on the other hand,havebeenalignedatthewordlevelusingthe GIZA++package 9 (OchandNey,2003).
GIZA++ consists of a set of statistical translation models of different complexity, namely the IBM ones (Brown et al., 1993).
For both corpora, the tokenization resulting from the post-processing stage prior to parsing was used in the alignment process for the English and Polish parts in order to keepthesamesegmentationespeciallytofacilitate manualannotationforevaluationpurposes.
Moreover, each word being assigned a lemma at the POStaggingstage,thesentencesgivenasinputto GIZA++ were lemmatized, as lemmatization has proven to boost statistical word alignment performances.
On the Polish side, a rough tokenizationusingblanksandpunctuationwasrealised;no lemmatization was performed.
The IBM-4 model has been trained on each bi-text in both translation directions and the intersection of Viterbi 9 GIZA++ is available at http://www.jfoch.com/GIZA++.html.
alignments obtained has been used to project the morpho-syntacticannotations.
Inotherwords,our first goal was to test the extent to which the directprojectionacrossEnglishorFrenchandPolish was accurate.
Therefore, we relied only on oneto-one alignments, thus favouring precision to the detrimentofrecallforthispreliminarystudy.
Figure3showsanexampleofwordalignmentoutput.
The intersection in both directions is represented with plain arrows; the dotted ones represent unidirectional alignments.
It shows that the intersectionresultsinanincompletealignmentwhichmay differ depending on the pair of languages considered and the segmentation performed in each language 10 . Les sanctions sont réglées dans la convention de subvention Sankcje sa uregulowane w porozumiewaniach o dotacji Sanctions are_regulated in grant agreements Figure 3: Intersection of IMB-4 model Viterbi alignmentsinbothtranslationdirections 5 Evaluation 5.1 Method In order to evaluate the annotation projection, anaposteriorireference was constructed, which means that a sample of the output was selected randomlyandannotatedmanually.
Therearesome advantages to work with this kind of reference.
First, it is less time-consuming than an aapriorireference built independently from the output obtained.
Second, it allows to skip the cases for whichitisdifficulttodecidewhethertheyarecorrect or not: syntactic analysis may be ambiguous and translation often makes it difficult to determine which source unit corresponds to which target one (Och and Ney, 2003).
A better level of confidence may thus be ensured with anaposteriorireferenceincomparisonwithahumanannotation task where a choice is to be made for each case.
Finally, whatever strategy is adopted, there is always a part of subjectivity in human annotation.
Thus, the results may vary from one person toanother.
Themajordrawbackofanaposteriori reference is that it allows to assess only precision 10 Theunderscoreindicatestokenconflation.
56 andnotrecallsinceitpreciselyonlycontainsdata provided as output of the algorihtm subjected to evaluation.
5.2 Parameters
The sample used in order to constitute theaposteriorireferenceismadeof50French/Polishsentencesand50English/Polishsentences.
Thesame sentencesin each language version wereselected.
Indeed, one of the goals of this study is to determine if the choice of the source language has an influence on annotation projection results.
These 50sentencescorrespondto800evaluatedtagsand 400 evaluated dependencies in the French/Polish bi-text, and 782 evaluated POS tags and 391 dependenciesintheEnglish/Polishbi-text.
Several parameters have been taken into account for each type of annotation projection by answeringyesornotothepointslistedbelow.
ForPOStags: 1a.
theprojectedPOSisthecorrectone; 2a.
the gender and number of nouns, adjectives andpastparticiplesarecorrect.
Thegenderparameterhasbeenevaluatedonlyfor the projection from French to Polish as this informationwasnotavailableinEnglish.
Fordependencies: 1b.
there is a dependency relation between two givenPolishwordsregardlessofitslabel; 2b.
thelabelofthedependencyiscorrect. Each time the answerto points 2a and 2b wasno, the information about the correct annotation was added.
6 Results
6.1 Performances Table3presentsthenumberofprojectedPOStags anddependencieswithrespecttoeachsourcelanguage.
It gives the precision for each parameter, POS tag (1a), number and gender (2a), unlabeled dependencies (1b) and labeled dependencies (2b) assessedagainsttheaposteriorireference.
ItshowsthatthenumberofprojectedPOStagsas well as syntactic relations is slightly lower when Englishisusedassourcelanguage.
Alowernumber of identified alignment links or dependencies may explain this difference.
It also should be Fr/Pl En/Pl projectedPOStags 800 782 1a POStags .87 .88 2a number .88 .91 2a gender .59 – projecteddependencies 400 391 1b unlabeleddependencies .83 .82 2b labeleddependencies .62 .67 Table3: Precisionaccordingtoeachevaluatedparameter noted that the evaluated projections are not necessarily the same in both corpora.
As mentioned insection5.1,thesamesentenceswerechosenfor evaluation.
Nevertheless, since word alignment depends on the pair of languages involved, it has an impact on the projections obtained and the a posteriorireferencebuiltontheirbasis.
The precision rates vary according to the type of informationsinduced.
Nosignificantdifferenceis observed whether the source language is French or English.
The number subcategory achieves the highest score: 0.88 and 0.91 respectively for French/Polish and English/Polish.
Dependencies rank second—0.83 and 0.82—but an important decrease in accuracy—about 20%—is observed when their labels are taken into account.
Finally, for French, the gender category achieves the lowest score: 0.59.
The main reasons for which annotationprojectionfailsareinvestigatedhereafter.
Theprojectionofthenumberandgendersubcategoriesarenottakenintoaccount.
6.2 Resultanalysis
There are various reasons for the failure of the POS tags and dependencies’ projection: a) word alignment, b) lexical density, c) tokenization, d) POS tagging/parsing errors and e) insertion (for dependencies).
In following examples, the word alignments are bold faced and in order to avoid confusion, thePOStagsonthePolishsidearethe intendedPOStagsandnottheinducedPOStags.
a) The noun countries is aligned to trzecich 11 which is actually an adjective.
On the other hand,participationandudziałbeing aligned, the projecteddependencyisalsoerroneous.
Participation_N 1 ofthirdcountries_N 2 Udział_N 1 pa´nstwtrzecich_ADJ 2 11 Thecorrectalignmentispa´nstw.
57 b)Underistranslatedbytheprepositionnalphrase napodstawie but is aligned only to podstawie whichisanoun.
Thus,theprojectedtagcannotbe assigned just topodstawie, which is also the case withthePMODdependencybetweenzawarteand podstawie.
concluded_PPA 1 under_PREP 2 the general framework zawarte_PPA 1 napodstawie_N 2 ogólnychram c) This case is similar to the previous but the difference in lexical density is partly caused by the conflation of inaccordancewith, which corresponds to the prepositionnal phrasezgodnie z,atthepost-processingstageofthePOStagging.
They must be constituted in_accordance_with_PREP 1 thelaw_N 2 Musz˛aby´c ustanowione zgodnie_ADV 1 z prawem_N 2 d) The following example shows an error in PCOMP attachement resulting in an error in dependency projection: with is linked to pursue instead of activities and the same relation is assignedtooandzajmowa´c.
They must pursue_V 1 activities with_PREP 2 a Europeandimension Musz˛azajmowa´c_V 1 si˛edziałalno´sci˛ao_PREP 2 europejskimwymiarze e) On the Polish side, the inserted noun postanowie´ngovernstraktatu.
Thus, the PCOMP dependency does not linkdlaandtraktatubutdla andpostanowie´n.
Withoutprejudicefor_PREP 1 theTreaty_N 2 Bez uszczerbku dla_PREP 1 postanowie´n Traktatu_N 2 Considering the precision figures, in particular those accounting for the projection of dependencies which decrease significantly when labels are considered, we tried to determine if there are indirect yet regular French/Polish and English/Polish correspondences.
By indirect correspondence we mean that a given source POS tag or dependency is usually rendered by a given Polish POS tag or dependency.
The correspondences are calculated provided there is no error prior to projection (word alignment, taggingorparsing).
Table 4 shows the direct and indirect correspondences among the POS tags which occur in the reference set.
We can see that there is a direct correspondenceamongPOStagsin92%and93% of the cases respectively for French/Polish and English/Polish projection.
Moreover, the indirect correspondences, for example noun/adjective or verb/noun, are similar for both source languages.
The following examples show occurrences of noun/adjectiveandverb/nouncorrespondences.
theexerciceofimplementing_Npowers l’exercicedescompétencesd’exécution_N wykonywaniauprawnie´nwykonawczych_ADJ measures planned to ensure_V dissemination mesures prévues pour assurer_V la diffusion ´srodki zaplanowane dla zapewnienia_N rozpowszechnienia Someindirectcorrespondencesaremoreprobable than others that seem unexpected.
Most of the time the latter come from the differences in tokenizationmentionedabove.
FrPOS PlPOS c N_359 N_349;ADJ_6;PPA_3;V_1 .97 ADJ_74 ADJ_69;N_3;V_1;DET_1 .93 V_68 V_55;N_13 .80 PPA_67 PPA_59;V_6;ADJ_1;N_1 .88 PREP_35 PREP_24; N_7; DET_2; V_1; PPR_1 .68 others_61 same_56 .91 664 612 .92 EnPOS PlPOS c N_374 N_364;ADJ_9;PPA_1 .97 PREP_64 PREP_53;N_7;DET_4 .83 V_51 V_35;PPA_10;N_6 .69 ADJ_46 ADJ_42;N_2;V_1;DET_1 .91 DET_36 DET_33;N_2 .91 others_73 same_70 .95 644 597 .93 Table 4: French/Polish and English/Polish POS tagcorrespondences Table5summarizesdirectandindirectcorrespondences among syntactic dependency relations.
It can be seen that direct correspondence rates for dependencies are lower than direct correspondences for POS tags: 78% when the source language is French source and 82% when it is 58 English.
Moreover, the difference according to thesourcelanguage—5%infavourofEnglish—is more important than for POS tags—1% in favour of English.
It is mainly due to the PMOD and PCOMP relations: thefirstconnectsapreposition to its governor and the second connects the dependent to a preposition.
Since Polish is an inflected language, the connections between words are indicated through cases.
In particular, it results in a noun not being necessarily linked to another noun by a preposition.
This is also the case for English, as far as compounds are concerned,whileinFrenchaprepositionisalmost always required to form noun phrases.
This is one of the reasons why the direct correspondence rate between English and Polish is higher than between French and Polish.
The following example shows a direct MOD/MOD correspondence for the English/Polish pair and an indirect PMOD_PCOMP/MOD correspondence for the French/Polishone.
purity MOD −→ criteria_Nsubstances_Nlisted les critères_N PMOD_de_PCOMP −→ pureté des substancesénumérés kryteria_N MOD −→ czyszto´sci_N dla substancji wymienionych FrDEP PlDEP c PMOD_111 PMOD_56;MOD_51;OBJ_4 .50 MOD_106 MOD_106 1 PCOMP_35 PCOMP_25; MOD_7; OBJ_2; PMOD_1; .71 OBJ_23 OBJ_16;MOD_5;PMOD_2 .69 SUJ_19 SUJ_18;OBJ_1 .94 others_38 same_38 1 332 259 .78 EnDEP PlDEP c MOD_95 MOD_90;PMOD_5 .94 PMOD_93 PMOD_59; MOD_26; PCOMP_4; OBJ_3;SUBJ_1 .63 PCOMP_64 PCOMP_49;MOD_8;PMOD_7 .76 DET_29 DET_29 1 OBJ_23 OBJ_22;PMOD_1 .95 others_18 same_18 1 322 267 .83 Table5: French/PolishandEnglish/Polishsyntacticcorrespondences 7 Discussion The results of the projection of POS tags and dependencies concur with those reported in the relatedworkspresentedinsection2.
First,concerning the number and gender subcategories, Borin (2002) has found that the former is applicable acrosslanguageswhereasthelatterislessrelevant, atleastfortheGerman/Swedishlanguagepair.
As seen in section 3, the projection of the number subcategory offers the highest score and the projection of the gender the lowest—0.59.
It was to be expected that gender would perform the worst considering its arbitrary nature at least in French andPolish.
Indeed,therearethreegendersinPolish, masculine, feminine and neutral, as well as in English, and two in French.
Thus, not only the numberofgendersacrossFrenchandPolishisdifferentbuttheyarenotdistributedinthesameway inbothlanguages.
Theinformationongenderwas not available for English, gender being assigned accordingtothehuman/non-humanfeature.
Considering POS tags, the level of direct correspondence is the highest one when compared to thenumberandgendersubcategoriesaswellasto dependencies.
The precision performed is however lower with respect to the figures obtained by Borin (2002) on the one hand, and Yarowski et al.’s (2001) on the other hand.
In Borin’s study, precision was assessed provided the word alignments used to project POS tags were correct.
In thisstudy,precisionhasbeenevaluatedregardless of possible errors prior to projection.
When these errors are discarded, the precision rates are similar.
In Yarowski et al.’s work (2001), the evaluation did not concern annotation projection but an inducedtaggertrainedon500Koccurrencesofautomatically derived POS tag projections.
Indeed, theauthorsclaimthatdirectannotationprojection isquitenoisy.
Thisstudyshowsthatsuchasimple approach can perform fairly well as far as precision is concerned.
The results are likely to be improvedbyimplementingbasicPOStagconversion rulesassuggestedin(Borin,2002).
For the projection of dependencies, defining such conversion rules seems necessary assuggested by the significant difference in precision when the projection of unlabeled and labeled dependencies are compared.
Polish does not proceed in the same way to encode syntactic functions as compared to English or French.
Nevertheless, some of the syntactic divergences observed seem regu59 larenoughtobeusedtoderiveindirectcorrespondences.
Hwa et al.(2002) have noticed that applying elementary linguistic transformations considerablyincreasesprecisionandrecallwhenprojecting syntactic relations, at least for the English/Chinese language pair.
The present study suggests that this kind of approach is promising for the English/Polish and French/Polish pairs as well.
Theexceptionnalstatusofthecorpuscertainlyinfluencesthequalityoftheresults.
Legislativetexts of the EU in their different language versions are legally binding.
Thus, they have to be as close as possible semantically and this constraint may favourthedirectcorrespondencesobserved.
8 Conclusion
Wehavepresentedasimpleyetpromisingmethod based on aligned corpora to induce linguistic annotations in Polish texts.
POS tags and dependenciesaredirectlyprojectedtothePolishpartof the corpus from the automatically annotated English or French part.
As far as precision is concerned, the direct projection is fairly efficient for POS tags but appears to be too restrictive for dependencies.
Nevetheless, the results are encouraging since they are likely to be improved by applying indirect correspondence rules.
They validate the idea of the existence of direct or indirect yetregularcorrespondencesontheEnglish/Polish and French/Polish language pairs which has already been tested with some syntax-based alignmenttechniques(Ozdowska,2004;Ozdowskaand Claveau, 2005).
The next step will consist in exploitingtheindirectcorrespondencesandthemultiple sources of information provided by two different source languages.
Moreover, using IBM-4 wordalignmentsinonedirectioninsteadoftheintersectionwillbeconsidered.
Thisworkmainlyfocussesonprecisionthuslacking information on recall.
Larger scale evaluationswouldbenecessarytovalidatetheapproach, particularly evaluations that could measure recall, since the amount of evaluation data used is this studycouldbeconsideredtoolimited.
References Lars Borin.
2002. Alignment and tagging.
In Lars Borin,editor,Parallelcorpora,parallelworlds: selected papers from a symposium on parallel and comparable corpora at Uppsala University, pages 207–217.Rodopi,Amsterdam/NewYork.
DidierBourigault,CécileFabre,CécileFrérot,MariePauleJacques,andSylwiaOzdowska.
fothcoming. Acquisitionetévaluationsurcorpusdepropriétésde sous-catégorisation syntaxique.
T.A.L (Traitement AutomatiquedesLangues).
Peter F.
Brown, Stephen.
A. Della Pietra, Vincent J.
Della Pietra, and Robert L.
Mercer. 1993.
The mathematics of statistical machine translation: parameter estimation.
Computational Linguistics, 19(2):263–311.
Tomaž Erjavec, Camelia Ignat, BrunoPouliquen, and Ralf Steinberger.
2005. Massive multilingualcorpus compilation: Acquis communautaire and TOTALE.In2nd Language and Technology Conference.
CécileFabreandDidierBourigault. 2001.
Linguistic cluesforcorpus-basedacquisitionoflexicaldependencies.
InCorpusLinguisitcConference. Rebecca Hwa, Philip Resnik, Amy Weinberg, and Okan Kolak.
2002. Evaluating translational correspondence using annotation projection.
In 40th Annual Conference of the Association for ComputationalLinguistics.
GeoffreyLeech. 1997.
Introductingcorpusannotation. In Roger Garside, Geoffrey Leech, and Anthony McEnery,editors,CorpusAnnotation.LinguisticInformationfromComputerTextcorpora,pages1–18.
Longman,London/NewYork.
FranzJosefOchandHermannNey. 2003.
Asystematiccomparisonofvariousstatisicalalignmentmodels.
ComputationalLinguistics,1(29):19–51.
SylwiaOzdowskaandVincentClaveau. 2005.
Alignement de mots par apprentissage de règles de propagation syntaxique en corpus de taille restreinte.
In Conférence sur le Traitement Automatique des LanguesNaturelles,pages243–252.
SylwiaOzdowska. 2004.
Identifyingcorrespondences between words: an approach based on a bilingual syntactic analysis of French/English parallel corpora.
In Multilingual Linguistic Resources WorkshopofCOLING’04.
BrunoPouliquenandRalfSteinberger. 2005.
Theacquis communautaire corpus.
In JRC Enlargement andIntegrationWorkshop.
Helmut Schmidt.
1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees.
In 1st International Conference on New Methods in Natural Language Processing.
David Yarowski, Grace Ngai, and Richard Wicentowski.
2001. Inducing multilingual text analysis tools via robust projection across aligned corpora. In1stHumanLanguageTechnologyConference .

