Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop on Tree Adjoining Grammar and Related Formalisms, pages 41–48, Sydney, July 2006.
c©2006 Association for Computational Linguistics Pied-Piping in Relative Clauses: Syntax and Compositional Semantics based on Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammar Chung-hye Han Department of Linguistics Simon Fraser University chunghye@sfu.ca Abstract In relative clauses, the wh relative pronoun can be embedded in a larger phrase, as in a boy [whose brother] Mary hit.
In such examples, we say that the larger phrase has pied-piped along with the whword.
In this paper, using a similar syntactic analysis for wh pied-piping as in Han (2002) and further developed in Kallmeyer and Scheffler (2004), I propose a compositional semantics for relative clauses based on Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammar.
It will be shown that (i) the elementary tree representing the logical form of a wh-word provides a generalized quantifier, and (ii) the semantic composition of the pied-piped material and the wh-word is achieved through adjoining in the semantics of the former onto the latter.
1 Introduction
In relative clauses, the wh relative pronoun can be embedded in a larger phrase, as in (1) and (2).
In such examples, we say that the larger phrase containing the wh-word has PIED-PIPED along with the wh-word.
(1) a boy [ [whose brother]i Mary hit ti ] (2) a boy [[whose brother’s friend]i Mary hit ti] In this paper, using a similar syntactic analysis for wh pied-piping as in Han (2002) and further developed in Kallmeyer and Scheffler (2004), I propose a compositional semantics for relative clauses of the sort illustrated in (1) and (2), based on Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammar (STAG).
The two main components of my proposal are that (i) the semantic tree representing the logical form of a wh relative pronoun provides a generalized quantifier, and (ii) the semantic composition of the pied-piped material and the wh-word is achieved through adjoining of the former onto the latter in the semantics.
Although TAG semantics for relative clauses based on flat semantics have been proposed before (Han, 2002; Kallmeyer, 2003), no STAG-based analysis exists, as far as I know.
In section 2, I introduce the framework of STAG and STAG-based compositional semantics and clarify my assumptions.
In section 3, I present my analysis of relative clauses and pied-piping.
I extend the proposed analysis to relative clauses in which wh-word is in a PP and those in which no pied-piping has taken place in section 4.
2 STAG-based Compositional Semantics Before presenting my analysis of relative clauses, I first illustrate the framework of STAG-based compositional semantics and clarify my assumptions, using a simple sentence that contains an existential quantifier and an attributive adjective in (3).
(3) John saw a good movie.
I use STAG as defined in Shieber (1994).
In an STAG, each syntactic elementary tree is paired with one or more semantic trees that represent its logical form with links between matching nodes.
A synchronous derivation proceeds by mapping a derivation tree from the syntax side to an isomorphic derivation tree in the semantics side, and is synchronized by the links specified in the elementary tree pairs.
In the tree pairs given in Figure 1, the trees in the left side are syntactic elementary trees and the ones in the right side are semantic trees.
In the semantic trees, F stands for formulas, R for predicates and T for terms.
I assume that these nodes are typed and I represent predicates as unreduced λ-expressions.
The linked nodes are shown with boxed numbers.
For sake of simplicity, in the elementary tree pairs, I only include links that are relevant for the derivation of given examples.
Figure 1 contains elementary trees required to generate the syntactic structure and the logical 41 angbracketleftbigg(αjohn) DP D John (αprimejohn) T Johnprime angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg (αa movie) DP D a NP 1 N movie braceleftbigg(αprimea movie) T x (βprimea movie) F ∃x F R 1 λx.movie(x) T x F* bracerightbiggangbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(βgood) NP AdjP Adj good NP* (βprimegood) R R λx.good(x) R* angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(αsaw) TPDP i↓ 1 Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V saw DP↓ 2 (αprimesaw) F 2 R λxλy.saw(y,x) T↓ 2 T↓ 1 angbracketrightbigg Figure 1: Elementary trees for John saw a good movie.
form of (3).
All the syntactic elementary trees satisfy Frank’s (2002) Condition on Elementary Tree Minimality (CETM), which states that “the syntactic heads in an elementary tree and their projections must form an extended projection of a single lexical head” (Frank 2002, p.
54). Particularly, (αa movie) is a valid elementary tree, as a noun can form an extended projection with a DP, in line with the DP Hypothesis.
The proper name tree in (αJohn) is paired with a tree representing a term in the semantics, and the attributive adjective tree in (βgood) is paired with an auxiliary tree in the semantics that represents a one-place predicate to be adjoined to another one-place predicate.
As for the syntax-semantics pairing of elementary trees for quantified DPs, I follow Shieber and Schabes (1990), and use Tree Local Multi-Component TAG (as defined in Weir (1988)) in the semantics.
Thus, the DP in (αa movie) is paired with a multi-component set {(αprimea movie), (βprimea movie)} in the semantics: (αprimea movie) provides an argument variable, and (βprimea movie) provides the existential quantifier with the restriction and scope.
The transitive tree in (αsaw) is paired with a semantic tree representing a formula that consists of a two-place predicate and two term nodes.
The links, shown with boxed numbers, guarantee that whatever substitutes into DPi, the corresponding semantic tree will substitute into the term node marked with 1, and whatever substitutes into DP is paired up with a multi-component set in the semantics where one of the components will substitute into the term node marked with 2 and the other will adjoin onto the F node marked with 2. The syntactic and semantic derivation trees are given in Figure 2, and the derived trees are given in Figure 3.
I leave out the tree addresses in the semantic derivation tree, as these are determined by the links between the syntactic and semantic elementary trees.1 angbracketleftbigg(δ3) (αsaw) (αa movie) DP (βgood) NP (αJohn) DPi (δprime3) (αprimesaw) {(βprimea movie), (αprimea movie)} (βprimegood) (αprimeJohn) angbracketrightbigg Figure 2: Derivation trees for John saw a good movie.
The semantic derived trees can be reduced by applying λ-conversion, as the nodes dominate typed λ-expressions and terms.
When reducing semantic derived trees, in addition to λ-conversion, I propose to use Predicate Modification, as defined in Heim and Kratzer (1998) in (4).
(4) Predicate Modification If α has the form α β γ, 1In sentences with more than one quantified DPs, I assume multiple adjoining (as defined in Schabes and Shieber (1994)) of quantifier trees at the same F node, leaving the order unspecified.
This provides an underspecified representation and accounts for scope ambiguity.
42 angbracketleftbigg(γ3) TP DPi D John Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V saw DP D a NP AdjP Adj good NP N movie (γprime3) F ∃x F R R λx.good(x) R λx.movie(x) T x F R λxλy.saw(y,x) T x T Johnprime angbracketrightbigg Figure 3: Derived trees for John saw a good movie.
and [[β]]s and [[γ]]s are both in D<e,t>, then [[α]]s = λxe[[β]]s(x) ∧ [[γ]]s(x).
The application of Predicate Modification and λconversion to (γprime3) reduces it to the formula in (5).
(5) ∃x[good(x) ∧ movie(x)] [saw(Johnprime,x)] 3 An STAG analysis of pied-piping in relative clauses I propose the elementary tree pairs in Figure 4 for the syntactic derivation and semantic composition of the relative clause in (1).
In the syntax side, (αwho) substitutes into DPj in (βhit), and the pied-piping of the rest of the DP is achieved by adjoining (β’s brother) onto (αwho).
The tree in (β’s brother) is a widely-accepted genitive structure according to the DP hypothesis, where the genitive ’s heads the DP tree.
This satisfies CETM, as a DP is an extended projection of a noun.
Substituting (αmary) into DPi in (βhit) completes the derivation of the relative clause.
The derivation tree for the relative clause is in (δ1) in Figure 5 and the derived tree is in (γ1) in Figure 6.angbracketleftbigg (δ1) (βhit) (αwho) DPj (β’s brother) DP (αMary) DPi (δprime1) (βprimehit) (βprimewho) (βprime’s brother) (αprimeMary) angbracketrightbigg Figure 5: Derivation trees for whose brother Mary hit Semantically, we must make sure that the variable coming from the wh-word is also the one being predicated of the head noun (boy in (1)), and yet the same variable does not serve as an argument of the predicate (hit in (1)) in the relative clause.
I argue that the introduction of a generalized quantifier (GQ) node in the semantic tree in (βprimewho) and adjoining of (βprime’s brother) onto the GQ node guarantee this.
I define the logical form of a wh relative pronoun as an auxiliary tree given in (βprimewho).
In (βprimewho), λx binds x in the generalized quantifier, λP.P(x).
Adjoining (βprimewho) onto the relative clause elementary tree in (βprimehit) essentially has the effect of abstracting over the variable coming from the wh-word in the relative clause, turning it into a one-place predicate.
This therefore ensures that the relative clause and the head noun are predicating over the same variable, deriving the interpretation of the relative clause as a modifier of the head noun.
The meaning of the pied-piped material ’s brother is added onto the meaning of who by adjoining the auxiliary tree defined in (βprime’s brother) onto the GQ node in (βprimewho).
In (βprime’s brother), λy ensures that the variable coming from the DP* (who) is in some relation with the variable coming from the head of the pied-piped DP (whose brother), and λQ, by turning whose brother into a GQ, ensures that the variable coming from the head of the pied-piped DP is the argument of the predicate that the DP combines with.
The derivation tree and the derived tree in the semantics side are given in (δprime1) in Figure 5 and (γprime1) in Figure 6.
After all the λconversions have applied, (γprime1) can be reduced to the expression in (6).
(6) λx.THEz[brother(z) ∧ Rel(x,z)] [hit(Maryprime,z)] 43 angbracketleftbigg(αmary) DP D Mary (αprimemary) T Maryprime angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(β’s brother) DP DP* Dprime D ’s NP N brother (βprime’s brother) GQ λQ F GQ* R λy F THEz F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(βhit) NP NP* CP DPj↓ 1 Cprime C TP DPi↓ 2 Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V hit DP tj (βprimehit) R R* R 1 R λxλy.hit(x,y) T↓ 2 angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(αwho) DP D who (βprimewho) R λx F GQ λP.P(x) R* angbracketrightbigg Figure 4: Elementary trees for whose brother Mary hit angbracketleftbigg(γ1) NP NP* CP DPj DP D who Dprime D ’s NP N brother Cprime C TP DPi D Mary Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V hit DP tj (γprime1) R R* R λx F GQ λQ F GQ λP.P(x) R λy F THEz F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) R R λxλy.hit(x,y) T Maryprime angbracketrightbigg Figure 6: Derived trees for whose brother Mary hit 44 The expression in (6) is a one-place predicate which can be paraphrased as a set of all x’s such that there is a unique brother z and x is in some relation with z and Mary hit z.
As the semantics of relative clauses is defined to be a one-place predicate, it is analogous to attributive adjectives.
This means that the semantic tree resulting from the adjoining of (γprime1) onto the logical form of the head noun boy can be reduced to the expression in (7) through Predication Modification.
(7) λx.boy(x) ∧ THEz[brother(z) ∧ Rel(x,z)] [hit(Maryprime,z)] The derivation of a sentence containing (1), a boy whose brother Mary hit, as the object, as in (8), proceeds in a similar fashion as in (3), yielding the semantic derived tree which is reducible to the formula in (9).
(8) John saw a boy whose brother Mary hit.
(9) ∃x[boy(x) ∧ THEz[brother(z) ∧ Rel(x,z)] [hit(Maryprime,z)]] [saw(Johnprime,x)] For the syntactic derivation and the compositional semantics of the relative clause in (2), all we need to do is add the tree pair in Figure 7 to the set of elementary tree pairs in Figure 4.
In the syntax side, (β’s friend) adjoins onto (β’s brother) and in the semantics side, (βprime’s friend) adjoins onto (βprime’s brother), as shown in the derivation trees in Figure 8.
The derived trees are given in Figure 9.
The semantic derived tree (γprime2) can be reduced to the expression in (10) through λ-conversions.angbracketleftbigg (β’s friend) DP DP* Dprime D ’s NP N friend (βprime’s friend) GQ λQ F GQ* R λy F THEz F F friend(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) angbracketrightbigg Figure 7: Elementary trees for ’s friend (10) λx.THEz[brother(z) ∧ Rel(x,z)] [THEz[friend(z) ∧ Rel(z,z)] [hit(Maryprime,z)]] angbracketleftbigg(δ2) (βhit) (αwho) DPj (β’s brother) DP (β’s friend) DP (αMary) DPi (δprime2) (βprimehit) (βprimewho) (βprime’s brother) (βprime’s friend) (αprimeMary) angbracketrightbigg Figure 8: Derivation trees for whose brother’s friend Mary hit 4 Extensions The proposed syntax and the semantics of piedpiping can straightforwardly be extended to cases in which the wh-word is embedded in a PP, as in (11).
(11) a boy [ [DP the brother of whom]i Mary hit ti ] For the derivation of (11), we need to change two of the elementary tree pairs in Figure 4 slightly.
The elementary tree pairs <(αwho), (βprimewho)> and <(β’s brother), βprime’s brother)> need to be replaced with the pairs in Figure 10.
Since the relative pronoun in (11) is whom, we use a DP tree anchoring whom in (αwhom).
The corresponding semantic tree (βprimewhom) remains exactly the same as before.
(βthe brother of) represents the piedpiped material in DP.
It is a well-formed elementary tree according to CETM as it has a single lexical head brother and DP is an extended projection of this head, and PP is not subject to CETM because P is a functional head, not a lexical head.
Moreover, DP* is licensed as it is an argument of the lexical head brother, as argued in Kroch (1989).
The semantics of the brother of whom is equivalent to whose brother, and therefore, we pair up (βthe brother of) with the exact same semantic tree as (βprime’s brother).
The derivation trees for the relative clause in (11) are given in Figure 11.
They look exactly the same as the ones for the relative clause in (1), except for names of the elementary trees in a few nodes.
The derived trees are given in Figure 12.
While the syntactic derived tree (γ11) is different from (γ1) in Figure 6 in the structure of DP containing the pied-piped material, the semantic derived tree (γprime11) looks exactly the same as (γprime1) in Figure 6.
This is as it should be given that the meaning of (1) and the meaning of (11) are equivalent.
45 angbracketleftbigg(γ2) NP NP* CP DPj DP DP D who Dprime D ’s NP N brother Dprime D ’s NP N friend Cprime C TP DPi D Mary Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V hit DP tj (γprime2) R R* R λx F GQ λQ F GQ λQ F GQ λP.P(x) R λy F THEz F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) R λy F THEz F F friend(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) R R λxλy.hit(x,y) T Maryprime angbracketrightbigg Figure 9: Derived trees for whose brother’s friend Mary hit angbracketleftbigg(αwhom) DP D whom (βprimewhom) R λx F GQ λP.P(x) R* angbracketrightbigg angbracketleftbigg(βthe brother of) DP D the NP N brother PP P of DP* (βprimethe brother of) GQ λQ F GQ* R λy F THEz F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) angbracketrightbigg Figure 10: Elementary trees for whom and the brother ofangbracketleftbigg (γ11) NP NP* CP DPj D the NP N brother PP P of DP D whom Cprime C TP DPi D Mary Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V hit DP tj (γprime11) R R* R λx F GQ λQ F GQ λP.P(x) R λy F THEz F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) R R λxλy.hit(x,y) T Maryprime angbracketrightbigg Figure 12: Derived trees for the brother of whom Mary hit 46 angbracketleftbigg(δ11) (βhit) (αwhom) DPj (βthe brother of) DP (αMary) DPi (δprime11) (βprimehit) (βprimewhom) (βprimethe brother of) (αprimeMary) angbracketrightbigg Figure 11: Derivation trees for the brother of whom Mary hitangbracketleftbigg (βa brother of) DP D a NP N brother PP P of DP* (βprimea brother of) GQ λQ F GQ* R λy F ∃z F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) angbracketrightbigg Figure 13: Elementary trees for whom and a brother of The proposed analysis can also be extended to relative clauses in which no pied-piping has taken place.
When the larger DP containing the relative pronoun is indefinite or non-specific, the DP can be stranded, as in (12).
This gives us a configuration where a wh-word has extracted out of a DP.
(12) a boy [whomi Mary hit [DP a brother of ti]] Since we now have a DP with an indefinite article, a tree pair in Figure 13 is needed, for the derivation of (12).
Using the semantic tree (βprimea brother of), the semantic composition of the relative clause in (12) can proceed as before: the semantic tree (βprimea brother of) adjoins onto the semantic tree (βprimewhom) in Figure 10, which then adjoins onto (βprimehit) in Figure 4.
In the syntax, however, we must make sure that (βa brother of) does not adjoin onto the relative pronoun whom, because if it did, we would end up with the string a brother of whom.
Instead, what we need is for (βa brother of) to adjoin onto the DP dominating the trace of the extracted object in (βhit).
This however is not a valid derivation in STAG, as elementary trees in a single pair are composing with two trees from two different pairs.
A slight modification in the syntactic elementary tree for (αwhom) in Figure 14 can fix this problem.
I propose to do this by turning (αwhom) into a multicomponent set {(αwhom), (βwhom)} as in Figure 14.
An auxiliary tree like (βwhom), which angbracketleftbiggbraceleftbigg(αwhom) DP D whom (βwhom) DP* bracerightbigg (βprimewhom) R λx F GQ λP.P(x) R* angbracketrightbigg Figure 14: Elementary trees for whom angbracketleftbigg(δ12) (βhit) {(αwhom), (βwhom)} DPj,DP (βa brother of) DP (αMary) DPi (δprime12) (βprimehit) (βprimewhom) (βprimea brother of) (αprimeMary) angbracketrightbigg Figure 15: Derivation trees for whom Mary hit a brother of does not dominate any other nodes, is a degenerate tree, and has been used in Kroch (1989) and Frank (2002) to handle extraction from a wh-island, as in [Which car]i does Sally wonder how to fix ti?
In syntax, to derive the relative clause in (12), (αwhom) substitutes into DPj in (βhit) as before, and (βwhom) adjoins onto the DP dominating the trace of the extracted object in (βhit), as shown in the derivation tree (δ12) in Figure 15.
And in semantics, (βprimewhom) adjoins onto (βprimehit) as before, as shown in (δprime12) in Figure 15.
Subsequently, in syntax (βa brother of) adjoins onto (βwhom) giving us the DP a brother of tj, and in semantics (βprimea brother of) adjoins onto (βprimewhom).
Thus, by using the multi-component set {(αwhom), (βwhom)}, we now have a situation where two elementary trees in a single pair are composing with two trees belonging to another pair.
The syntactic and the semantic derived trees are given in Figure 16.
After λ-conversions, (γprime12) can be reduced to the expression in (13).2 (13) λx.∃z[brother(z) ∧ Rel(x,z)] [hit(Maryprime,z)] 5 Conclusion I have shown that STAG-based compositional semantics for relative clauses with pied-piping is 2Partial stranding as in a boy [a picture of whom]i Mary made a copy of ti can be handled by composing a multicomponent set for whom containing a degenerate DP tree and another multi-component set for a picture of containing a degenerate DP tree.
Further, the impossibility of the stranding of subject DP, as in *a boy whomi [a brother of ti] hit Mary, can be handled by placing an NA constraint on the subject DP dominating a trace in the relative clause tree.
47 angbracketleftbigg(γ12) NP NP* CP DPj D whom Cprime C TP DPi D Mary Tprime T VP DP ti Vprime V hit DP D a NP N brother PP P of DP tj (γprime12) R R* R λx F GQ λQ F GQ λP.P(x) R λy F ∃z F F brother(z) F Rel(y,z) F Q(z) R R λxλy.hit(x,y) T Maryprime angbracketrightbigg Figure 16: Derived trees for whom Mary hit a brother of possible using examples in which the wh-word is embedded in a genitive DP, and shown that the proposed analysis can straightforwardly be extended to cases in which the wh-word is embedded in a PP.
The main ingredients of the proposed analysis are: in syntax, the pied-piped material adjoins to the wh-word, and in semantics, the whword provides a GQ to which the meaning of the pied-piped material adjoins.
I have also shown that similar analysis can handle cases in which the wh-word alone has moved to [Spec,CP], stranding the rest of the DP in situ, if we use a multicomponent set containing a degenerate DP for the syntax of the relative pronoun.
The proposed analysis utilizes composition operations in semantics that are already available in syntax, substitution and adjoining, thereby making syntax-semantics mapping in TAG simple and straightforward.
Acknowledgment I thank Anoop Sarkar and the three anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments.
References Robert Frank.
2002. Phrase Structure Composition and Syntactic Dependencies.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Chung-hye Han.
2002. Compositional semantics for relative clauses in Lexicalized Tree Adjoining Grammar.
A talk presented at TAG+6, Venice, Italy, www.sfu.ca/∼chunghye/papers/tag6-rc-slides.pdf.
Irene Heim and Angelika Kratzer.
1998. Semantics in Generative Grammar.
Blackwell, Oxford.
Laura Kallmeyer and Tatjana Scheffler.
2004. LTAG analysis for pied-piping and stranding of whphrases.
In Proceedings of TAG+7, pages 32–39, Vancouver, Canada.
Laura Kallmeyer.
2003. LTAG semantics for relative clauses.
In Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Computational Semantics (IWCS-5), Tilburg.
Anthony Kroch.
1989. Asymmetries in long-distance extraction in a Tree Adjoining Grammar.
In Mark Baltin and Anthony Kroch, editors, Alternative Conceptions of Phrase Structure, pages 66–98.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Yves Schabes and Stuart M.
Shieber. 1994.
An alternative conception of Tree-Adjoining derivation.
Computational Linguistics, pages 167–176.
Stuart Shieber and Yves Schabes.
1990. Synchronous Tree Adjoining Grammars.
In Proceedings of COLING’90, Helsinki, Finland.
Stuart Shieber.
1994. Restricting the weak-generative capacity of Synchronous Tree-Adjoining Grammars.
Computational Intelligence, 10(4).
David Weir.
1988. Characterizing Mildly ContextSensitive Grammar Formalisms.
Ph.D. thesis, University of Pennsylvania .

