Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation Workshop, pages 164–167, Prague, June 2007.
c©2007 Association for Computational Linguistics Multiple-steptreebankconversion: fromdependency toPennformat CristinaBosco DipartimentodiInformatica,Universit`adiTorino CorsoSvizzera 185 10149Torino-Italia bosco@di.unito.it Abstract Whilst the degree to which a treebank subscribes to a specific linguistic theory limits the usefulness of the resource, the availability of more formats for the same resource playsacrucial rolebothinNLPandlinguistics.
Conversiontoolsandmulti-formattreebanks are useful for investigating portability of NLP systems and validity of annotation.
Unfortunately,conversionisaquitecomplex task since it involves grammatical rules and linguistic knowledge to be incorporated into the converter program.
The paper focusses on a methodology for treebank conversion which consists in splitting the process in steps corresponding to thekindsofinformation thathavetobeconverted, i.e. morphological, structural or relational syntactic.
The advantage is the generation of a set of parallel treebanks featuring progressively differentiated formats.
An application to the case of an Italian dependency-based treebank in a Penn like format isdescribed.
1 Introduction
The usefulness of a treebank can be potentially limited by the degree to which it subscribes to a specific linguistic theory, and when anew annotation is devised which employs a different linguistic framework than a standard, the problem of how to relate the syntactic schemes to one another arises.
The increasing availability of multi-format treebanks (e.g.
(Bick, 2006)) and the automatic conversion from some formats to others, e.g.
(Collins et al, 1999; BahgatShehataandZanzotto,2006),areattemptsto overcome this problem.
The automatic conversion of a treebank plays an important role in NLP and linguistics.
First, it increasestheexportability ofthetreebank, makingusable tools developed for other resources.
Second, it underlies a full check on correctness and consistency of the treebank annotation.
Moreover, it is an explicit comparison among formats and linguistic frameworks.
Therefore, a conversion is crucial for overcoming the limits imposed by data in formats that realize different grammatical theories to very important activities such as parsing evaluation andcomparativetestingoftheadequatenessofarepresentation for particular linguistic phenomena, languages and/or tasks.
Forinstance, the availability of parallel annotations, and among them one in Penn format, can be of some aid in investigating the irreproducibility of the state-of-the-art results on treebanks or languages other than Penn and English, as empirically demonstrated by, e.g., (Collins et al, 1999) on Czech, (Dubey and Keller, 2003) on German,(Corazza etal,2004) on Italian.
Thepaper,first,presentsamethodology fortheconversion, then an application of the methodology to the conversion of a dependency-based treebank into a Penn-like format, and finally some remarks on the implementation.
2 Onthe
conversionmethodology The conversion of a treebank, annotated with some formatA,intoformatBconsists inasimplefiltering 164 andstringmanipulationonlywhenAandBbothfollow the same linguistic framework.
Elsewhere the conversion and development of parallel annotations is a challenging task, which involves grammatical rules and linguistic knowledge to be incorporated into the converter programs (see e.g.(Musillo and Sima’an, 2002) (Bick, 2006)).
Nevertheless, parallel annotations which employ different linguistic frameworks may serve as a suitable infrastructure for comparisons among them.
In fact, the definition of a conversion process is in itself a comparison between A and B, since it involves explicit assumptions about howAandBrelate,and avirtually complete and correct mapping which translates every analysis in A into the corresponding analysis in B(Musillo and Sima’an, 2002).
We propose a methodology that consists in organizing the conversion in steps to be performed in cascade.
Each step outputs a new annotation format, whichdifferentiates fromthepreviousoneonlywith respect to a single kind of knowledge, e.g. morphological, structural or functional syntactic.
The main advantage isinmakingavailable asetofparallel annotations for further use too.
In the next part, we describe the application of this methodology to the conversion of the Turin University Treebank (henceforth TUT), which exploits a dependency-based functionally rich annotation, into aPenn-like format.
3 Converting
TUT TUT is a project for an Italian treebank that features a dependency-based annotation following the dependency grammar major tenets (Hudson, 1984).
The annotation is centred on a notion of morphosyntactic-semantic grammatical relation whichaims atrepresentthesyntax-semantics interfacebymeans of the Augmented Relational Structure (Bosco, 2004).
TUTcurrently includes 2.000 sentences (see athttp://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/) where200 different dependency relations are annotated.
The figure 1a) showsan example of TUTtree.
Other Italian resources 1 implement, like TUT, particular representation formats and subscribe to specific linguistic frameworks, thus strongly limiting 1 Two other larger Italian treebanks exist: Venice Italian Treebank (VIT) (Delmonte, forthcoming) and Italian Syntactic SemanticTreebank (ISST)(Barsottietal,2001) activities such as the application of state-of-the-art parsers and parsing evaluation for this language.
The conversion of TUT in a Penn-like format is a crucial step towards the exportability of the resource, but also a first attempt at overcoming these limits by choosing as a further output a format of widespread use in training, testing and evaluating.
Moreover, since the process is fully deterministic, even ifcurrently applied on asmall corpus, theconversion isinitself apreliminary validation oftheresource and a demonstration that TUT annotation is expressive at least as Penn.
In the next sections, we show the translation of dependency into constituency trees and the management of differences in PoS tagging, structural syntactic, and syntactic-semantic relations faced during the conversion.
For detailed information about the conversion of specific linguistic phenomena see at http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/noteparallele.zip.
3.1 Firststep: morphology Since Italian is inflectionally richer than English, TUT PoS tagset is richer than that of Penn (see at http://www.di.unito.it/˜tutreeb/syntcat-22-702.doc), but we reduced it including only information that Penn makes explicit too, as usual in similar cases, see e.g.
(Collins et al, 1999) andhttp://www.coli.uni-sb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/.
The major differences with respect to Penn concern tags of Verbs, which include fine-grained temporal information and are organized in three classes (Modal, Auxiliary, Main), rather than two like in Penn (Modal and non-Modal).
Moreover, a finegrained variety of Adjectives and Pronouns enables the recovery of information such as e.g. the owner ofan object (possessive Adjective).
The output of this first step includes compact tags where features are expressed by short strings, like in (Collins et al, 1999).
The following are examples of TUTPoS native vs reduced tags: for a commonNoun’nome’is(NOMENOUNCOMMONM SING) reduced in (NOU˜CS); for the main infinite Verb ’entrare’ is (ENTRARE VERB MAIN INFINITEPRESINTRANS)reduced in (VMA˜IN).
3.2 Secondstep: structural syntax The main issue in this step is the conversion of dependency trees into Penn-like trees, i.e. 165 Figure 1: TUT (a), Constituency-TUT (b), Augmented-Penn (c) and Penn-like (d) representations of sentence ALB-4”Ilgoverno di Berisha appare in difficolt`a” (Thegovernment of Berisha appears introuble) constituency structures implementing a minimal projection strategy.
It is approached in two substeps: by first converting the TUT trees into a standard linguistically motivated Xbar form (i.e.
Constituency-TUT), and then into Penn format (i.e.
Augmented-Penn), butbothincluding thefunctional syntactic information as TUT, i.e. the grammatical relations (annotated on constituents).
Constituency-TUT is a TUT-oriented constituencybased annotation that introduces in TUT trees the types of the multiple words syntactic units (e.g.
VP and S).
Each terminal category X corresponds to a word of a TUT tree, and projects into non-terminal nodes, namelytheintermediate (Xbar)andmaximal (XP) projections of X.
The distinction between complements and adjuncts is here structurally marked.
Augmented-Penn instead features a format structurally isomorphic to Penn, but more functionally annotated.
ItappliestotheConstituency-TUTstructures the minimalprojection strategy 2,and manages thesmoothingofstructuresconceptually differentin TUT and Penn, i.e. those of Determiners, auxiliary Verbs and relative clauses.
In figure 1 you can see the same sentence in TUT, Constituency-TUT, Augmented-Penn and Penn format.
The conversion from dependency to constituency is not affected by the typical problem of nonprojective structures, since TUT represents them through projective structures exploiting null elements.
In dependency TUT,empty nodes also mark dropped subjects, and Constituency-TUT exploits 2 Each terminal category projects only when the constituent includes morethanone word 166 null elements for marking subjects which occur in non standard position with respect to the Verb (i.e.
extraposed). 3.3 Thirdstep: syntactic-semantic relations While Pennfeatures adescription ofrelations based only on a single component, TUT features an explicit, systematic annotation of three components in each relation.
Moreover, Penn includes a lower number of values for each component than TUT 3 andinvariouscasesthePenntagsdonotenablefinegrained distinctions as TUT.
Weapplied the original Penn tags that can be meaningful for Italian looking for correspondences between TUT and Penn relations (e.g.
using the relation LOC for all TUT LOC+ relations) 4. Nevertheless,themulti-step methodology makesavailable also a Penn-like format almost functionally rich as TUT,i.e.
Augmented-Penn 5 . 4 The converter The five modules of the converter are: M reduc for the reduction of PoS tags; M ctu which converts in the Constituency-TUT format; M augp, which convertsConstituency-TUTinAugmented-Penn; M pen, which takes Augmented-Penn and outputs Penn; M par thatgenerates theparenthetical notation ofthe output.
M ctu manages the conversion from dependency to constituency by implementing the algorithm in (Xia, 2001).
It recovers the types of phrases that (the grammatical category of) each node of the dependencytreeprojectsbyusingthelinguisticknowledge stored in dedicated tables.
The converter follows a lowest attachment strategy, i.e. the projection of a dependent attaches to a projection of its head as lowly as possible, but, in contrast with (Xia, 2001), it pursues a maximal rather 3 WhilePennannotates2morpho-syntactic,11syntacticand 7 semantic relations, TUT features 40 morpho-syntactic, 55 functional-syntactic and 88 semantic items for building relations.
4 The
conversion from NEGRA to Penn maintains instead the NEGRA relations, see at http://www.coli.unisb.de/sfb378/negra-corpus/. 5 Therelationslinkingterminalnodes encompassed inasingle constituent in Augmented-Penn are deleted during the conversion inthislatterformat.
than minimal projection heuristics, i.e. a category always projects into intermediate and maximal projections.
5 Conclusions
The methodology for treebank conversion here presented splits the process in steps, which correspond to the kinds of annotated linguistic knowledge that have to be converted.
Since each step outputs a new annotationformat,theadvantageisthegenerationof set ofparallel treebanks.
The application of the methodology in the conversionfromasmallItaliandependency-based treebank toa Pennlike format is described.
References A.
Bahgat Shehata and F.M.
Zanzotto. 2006.
A dependency-basedalgorithmforgrammarconversion.
Proc. of LREC ’06 F.
Barsotti and R.
Basili et al.2001. The Italian Syntactic-Semantic Treebank: Architecture, Annotation, Tools and Evaluation.
Kluwer,Dordrecht.
E. Bick.
2006. Turning a dependency-based treebank into a PSG-style constituent treebank.
Proc. of LREC 06.
C. Bosco.
2004. A grammatical relation system for tree-bank annotation.
PhDthesis,UniversityofTorino.
M.Collins,J.Hajic,L.Ramshaw,andC.Tillmann.
1999. AstatisticalparserofCzech.
Proc. of ACL’99.
A. Corazza, A.
Lavelli, G.
Satta, and R.
Zanoli. 2004 AnalyzinganItaliantreebankwithstate-of-the-artstatisticalparser.
In Proc.
of TLT-2004.
R. Delmonte.
forthcoming. Strutture sintattiche dall’analisi computazionale di corpora di italiano FrancoAngeli,Milano,Italy.
A. Dubey and F.
Keller. 2003.
Probabilistic parsing for German using sister-head dependencies.
Proc. of ACL’03.
R. Hudson.
1984. Word Grammar.
Basil Blackwell, OxfordandNewYork.
G. Musillo and K.
Sima’an. 2002.
Towards comparing parsersfromdifferentlinguisticframeworks.Aninformationtheoreticapproach.
Proc. of Workshop Beyond PARSEVAL.
F. Xia.
2001. Automatic grammar generation from two differentperspectives.
PhDthesis,UniversityofPennsylvania .

