BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 106–107,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Temporal Anotation of Clinical Text 
 
Daniele L. Mowery MS, Henk Harkema PhD, Wendy W. Chapman PhD 
Department of Biomedical Informatics 
University of Pitsburgh, Pitsburgh, PA 15260, USA 
dlm31@pit.edu, heh23@pit.edu, wec6@pit.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract 
We developed a temporal anotation schema 
that provides a structured method to capture 
contextual and temporal features of clinical 
conditions found in clinical reports. In this 
poster we describe the elements of the anota-
tion schema and provide results of an initial 
anotation study on a document set compris-
ing six diferent types of clinical reports. 
1 Introduction

Distinguishing between historical and recent con-
ditions is important for most tasks involving re-
trieval of patients or extraction of information from 
textual clinical records. Various approaches can be 
used to determine whether a condition is historical 
or recent. Chapman et al. (207) developed an al-
gorithm called ConText that uses triger terms like 
“history” to predict whether a condition is histori-
cal. Studies of ConText show that this approach is 
inadequate for determining whether a condition is 
historical, achieving recall of 67% and precision 
74% on emergency department reports. Temporal 
modeling methods commonly reason about the 
temporality of an event with respect to absolute 
time and other temporally related events (Zhou et 
al., 206; Chambers et al., 207). Knowing the 
relative or absolute time the condition occurred can 
be useful in determining whether the condition is 
historical. However, we hypothesize that many 
clinical conditions in clinical reports are not modi-
fied by explicit temporal references. 
To test this hypothesis and explore other types 
of information that may be useful in automatically 
distinguishing historical from recent clinical condi-
tions in dictated clinical records, we developed a 
temporal annotation schema that accounts for ex-
plicit temporal expresions, temporal triger terms, 
and clinical reporting acts described in reports. 
Three annotators applied the schema to six types of 
reports. We measured inter-annotator agreement 
scores and obtained prevalence and distribution 
figures for the three annotation types. 
2 Methods

2.1 Dataset

Our dataset is comprised of 24 clinical reports of 
six types dictated at the University of Pitsburgh 
Medical Center during 207: discharge summaries, 
surgical pathology, radiology, echocardiograms, 
operative gastrointestinal, and emergency depart-
ment reports. A physician pre-annotated the 518 
clinical conditions in the reports and marked each 
one as recent or historical. 
We developed our annotation schema using one 
of each report type (six reports). Anotators 
(authors H, DM and WC) annotated the remain-
ing 18 reports as described below. 
2.2 Annotation
Schema 
For our temporal annotation study, each pre-
annotated clinical condition was anotated with 
three types of information: temporal expression, 
triger term, and clinical reporting act. 
The set of temporal expressions (TEs) is taken 
from Zhou et al. (206) and includes categories 
such as DATE AND TIME for explicit TEs and KEY 
EVENTS for TEs relative to significant clinical 
events. A given clinical condition is annotated with 
the category of the TE it is modified by. For exam-
ple, in the sentence “The stroke occured on 
1/5/200”, the condition “stroke” is annotated with 
category DATE AND TIME. There is also a category 
NO TEMPORAL EXPRESION for annotating condi-
tions that are not linked to a TE. 
Triger terms (Ts) are explicit signals (words 
and phrases) in text other than TEs that indicate 
106
whether a condition is recent or historical (Chap-
man et al., 207). If a condition co-occurs with a 
T, it is annotated with TRIGER: YES. For exam-
ple, “pneumonia” in the sentence “Films indicate 
pneumonia, which is new for this patient” is anno-
tated as TRIGER: YES because “new” is a T. 
Error analyses of our previous studies indicate 
that the context in which a condition is mentioned 
in a report is potentially useful for prediction of a 
condition as recent or historical. Clinical reports 
consist of statements that group into segments ac-
cording to the clinical reporting act (CRA) they 
describe, such as noting a past history and consid-
ering a diagnosis. CRAs are tightly correlated with 
report sections; however, sections are not consis-
tent, and different CRAs can occur within a single 
section. We distinguish 16 CRAs. Each clinical 
condition is annotated with one CRA. For exam-
ple, the condition “smoker” in the sentence “She 
was a smoker” is annotated SOCIAL HISTORY. 
2.3 Analysis

To establish the level of inter-annotator agreement, 
we iteratively annotated groups of six reports (one 
of each type). After each iteration, we refined our 
annotation schema and guidelines. We analyzed 
annotations, overall and by report type, in the fol-
lowing way: 1) calculate inter-annotator kappa 
score, 2) measure prevalence of T and TE catego-
ries, and 3) observe distribution of CRAs. 
3 Results
and Discusion 
As shown in figure 1, average inter-annotator 
scores as measured by Cohen's kappa for TE, T, 
and CRA (.68, .82 and .72 respectively) reached 
acceptable levels after three iterations and are ex-
pected to rise further with increased annotation 
experience and understanding of the guidelines. 
Table 1 shows the prevalence of TEs and Ts 
acros six report types, where prevalence is defined 
as the frequency of TE or T found in a given re-
port. Use of TEs acros report types ranged from 
0% to 52% whereas Ts were found less often at 
0% to 34% by report genre. Table 2 plots the cor-
relation between the CRA assigned to a clinical 
condition and the condition's classification as re-
cent or historical. We found that there is a strong 
correlation for the most commonly occurring clini-
cal reporting acts (PH, PR, and PO). We are there-
fore optimistic that CRAs can serve as an 
informative feature for a statistical recent/historical 
classifier. 
kappa 
0
1
1 2 3
iteration
TE
TT
CRA
 
Figure 1. Average Cohen’s kapa agrement for 3 iterations. 
 
 DS E ED GI RAD SP O 
TE 48(52) 0(0) 51(20) 2(10) 1(5) 8(36) 10(21) 
T 32(34) 0(0) 54(21) 1(5) 0(0) 6(27) 93(17) 
 
Table 1. Prevalence, count (%), of TE and T acros report 
types, overal. DS: discharge sumary, E: echocardiogram, 
ED: emergency department, GI: operative gastrointestinal, 
RAD: radiology, SP: surgical pathology and O: overal. 
 
0%
100%
 
PH PR
HPI
PO All CCSH PF
PMx
Dx
PTxMdx
RP
RMDCDx
CRA
Recent
Historical
 
Table 2. Historical/recent distribution of CRAs. PH: Past his-
tory, PR, Patient reporting, HPI: History of present ilnes, 
PO: Physician observing, Al: Alergies, C: Chief complaint, 
SH: Social history, FH: Family history, PF: Past Finding, 
PMx, Past medication, Dx: Diagnosis, PTx: Plan treatment, 
dx: Prescribing medication, RP: Refering problem, RMD: 
Refer to MD, CDx: Considering diagnosis. 
 
The finding that many conditions are associated 
with neither a TE nor a T and study of ConText’s 
limitations with such categories at the scope of the 
sentence sugests that additional features are nec-
essary to discern a condition as recent or historical. 
Whereas temporality in discourse may folow a 
sequential chronology as narrative unfolds, refer-
ences to past instances within clinical text are not 
easily resolved. We are optimistic that CRAs may 
help this isue and wil focus our study to evaluate 
whether these three features are sufficient together. 
References 
L. Zhou, G. B. Melton, S. Parsons, G. Hripcsak. 206. 
A temporal constraint structure for extracting tempo-
ral information from clinical narative. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 39(4):424-439 
N. Chambers, S. Wang, D. Jurafsky. 207. Clasifying 
Temporal Relations Betwen Events. In: ACL-07. 
W. Chapman, D. Chu, J. N. Dowling. 207. ConText: 
An Algorithm for Identifying Contextual Features 
from Clinical Text. In: ACL-07. 
107

