Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 80–88,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Retrieval of ReadingMaterialsfor VocabularyandReadingPractice
MichaelHeilman,Le Zhao,JuanPino and MaxineEskenazi
LanguageTechnologiesInstitute
Carnegie MellonUniversity
Pittsburgh, PA 15213,USA
{mheilman,lezhao,jmpino,max}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
Finding appropriate, authentic reading mate-
rials is a challenge for language instructors.
The Web is a vast resource of texts, but most
pagesarenotsuitableforreadingpractice,and
commercialsearchenginesare not wellsuited
to finding texts that satisfy pedagogical con-
straintssuchasreadinglevel,length,textqual-
ity, and presence of target vocabulary. We
present a system that uses various language
technologiesto facilitatethe retrieval and pre-
sentation of authentic reading materials gath-
ered from the Web. It is currentlydeployed in
two English as a Second Languagecourses at
the Universityof Pittsburgh.
1 Introduction
Reading practice is an importantcomponentof first
and second language learning, especially with re-
gards to vocabulary learning (Hafiz and Tudor,
1989). Appropriating suitable reading material for
theneedsofaparticularcurriculumorparticularstu-
dent, however, is a challenging process. Manually
authoringoreditingreadingsis time-consumingand
raises issues of authenticity, which are particularly
significant in second language learning (Peacock,
1997). Ontheotherhand,theWeb is a vast resource
ofauthenticreadingmaterial,butcommercialsearch
engineswhichare designedfor a wide varietyof in-
formationneedsmaynoteffectivelyfacilitatethere-
trievalofappropriatereadingsforlanguagelearners.
Inordertodemonstratetheproblemoffindingap-
propriate reading materials, here is a typical exam-
ple of an informationneed from a teacherof an En-
glish as a Second Language (ESL) course focused
on reading skills. This example was encountered
during the development of the system. It should
be noted that while we describe the system in the
context of ESL, we claim that the approach is gen-
eral enough to be applied to first language reading
practice and to languages other than English. To
fit within his existing curriculum, the ESL teacher
wantedto findtextsonthespecifictopicof “interna-
tionaltravel.” He soughttexts that containedat least
a few words from the list of target vocabulary that
his student were learning that week. In addition, he
needed the texts to be within a particular range of
reading difficulty, fifth to eighth grade in an Ameri-
can school,and shorterthan a thousandwords.
Sendingthe query“internationaltravel” to a pop-
ularsearchenginedidnotproduceausefullistofre-
sults1. The first resultwas a travel warningfromthe
Department of State2, which was at a high reading
level (grade 10 accordingto the approachdescribed
by (Heilman et al., 2008)) and not likely to be of
interestto ESLstudentsbecauseof legal andtechni-
cal details. Most of the subsequentresults were for
commercialweb sites and travel agencies. A query
for a subset of the target vocabulary words for the
course also produced poor results. Since the search
engineusedstrictbooleanretrieval methods,the top
results for the query “deduce deviate hierarchy im-
plicit undertake” were all long lists of ESL vocabu-
lary words3.
We describe a search system, called REAP
Search, that is tailored to the needs of language
1www.google.com,March5, 2008
2http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis pa tw/cis pa tw 1168.html
3e.g., www.espindle.org/university word list uwl.html
80
teachers and learners. The system facilitates the re-
trievaloftextssatisfyingparticularpedagogicalcon-
straintssuchas readinglevel and text length,and al-
lows the user to constrain results so that they con-
tain at least some, but not necessarily all, of the
words from a user-specified target vocabulary list.
It also filters out inappropriate material as well as
pagesthatdo not containsignificantamountsof text
in well-formedsentences. Thesystemprovidessup-
port for learners including an interface for reading
texts, easy access to dictionary definitions, and vo-
cabularyexercisesfor practiceand review.
The educational application employs multiple
language technologies to achieve its various goals.
Information retrieval and web search technologies
provide the core components. Automatedtext clas-
sifiers organize potential readings by general topic
area and reading difficulty. We are also developing
anapproachtomeasuringreadingdifficultythatuses
a parser to extract grammatical structures. Part of
Speech (POS) tagging is used to filter web pages to
maintaintext quality.
2 Pathof
a Reading
IntheREAPSearchsystem,readingmaterialstakea
pathfromtheWeb to studentsthroughvariousinter-
mediatestepsasdepictedinFigure 1. First,acrawl-
ing program issues queries to large-scale commer-
cial searchenginesto retrieve candidatedocuments.
These documentsare annotated, filtered, and stored
inadigitallibrary,orcorpus. Thisdigitallibrarycre-
ation process is done offline. A customized search
interface facilitates the retrieval of useful reading
materials by teachers, who have particular curricu-
lar goals and constraintsas part of their information
needs. The teachersorganizetheir selectedreadings
through a curriculum manager. The reading inter-
face for studentsaccessesthe curriculummanager’s
database and provides the texts along with support
in theformof dictionarydefinitionsandpracticeex-
ercises.
3 Creatinga
DigitalLibraryof Readings
The foundation of the system is a digital library of
potential reading material. The customized search
component does not search the Web directly, but
rather accesses this filtered and annotated database
of Web pages. The current library consists of ap-
proximately five million documents. Construction
of the digital library begins with a set of target vo-
cabularywordsthatmightbe coveredby a courseor
set of courses(typically100-1,500words),and a set
ofconstraintsontextcharacteristics.Theconstraints
can be divided into three sets: those that can be ex-
pressedin a search enginequery (e.g., target words,
numberof target wordsper text, date,Web domain),
those that can be applied using just information in
the Web search result list (e.g., documentsize), and
thosethatrequirelocalannotationandfiltering(e.g.,
readinglevel, text quality, profanity).
The system obtains candidate documents by
query-based crawling, as opposed to following
chains of links. The query-based document crawl-
ing approach is designed to download documents
for particular target words. Queries are submitted
toa commercialWebsearchengine4, resultlinksare
downloaded,and then the correspondingdocuments
are downloaded. A commercial web search engine
is used to avoid the cost of maintaining a massive,
overly generalweb corpus.
Queries consist of combinations of multiple tar-
getwords. Thesystemgenerates30queriesforeach
target word (30 is a manageableand sufficientnum-
ber in practice). These are spread across 2-, 3-,
and 4-word combinations with other target words.
Queries to search engines can often specify a date
range. We employ ranges to find more recent mate-
rial, which students prefer. The tasks of submitting
queries, downloading the result pages, and extract-
ing document links are distributed among a dozen
or so clientsrunningon desktopmachines,to run as
background tasks. The clients periodically upload
their results to a server, and request a new batch of
queries.
Once the server has a list of candidate pages, it
downloads them and applies various filters. The fi-
nal yieldof texts is typicallyapproximatelyoneper-
centoftheoriginallydownloadedresults. Manyweb
pages are too long, contain too little well-formed
text, or are far above the appropriate reading level
for language learners. After downloading docu-
ments, the system annotates them as described in
the next section. It then stores the pages in a full-
4www.altavista.com
81
Figure1: Path of ReadingMaterialsfrom the Web to a Student.
text search engine called Indri, which is part of
the Lemur Toolkit5. This index provides a consis-
tent and efficient interface to the documents. Using
Lemurand the Indri Query Languageallows for the
retrieval of annotated documentsaccording to user-
specifiedconstraints.
4 AnnotationsandFilters
Annotators automatically tag the documents in the
corpus to enable the filtering and retrieval of read-
ingmaterialthatmatchesuser-specifiedpedagogical
constraints. Annotations include reading difficulty,
generaltopicarea, text quality, and text length. Text
length is simply the numberof word tokens appear-
ing in the document.
4.1 ReadingLevel
The system employs a language modeling ap-
proach developed by Collins-Thompsonand Callan
(Collins-Thompsonand Callan, 2005) that creates a
model of the lexicon for each grade level and pre-
dicts reading level, or readability, of given docu-
ments according to those models. The readabil-
ity predictor is a specialized Naive Bayes classi-
fier with lexical unigram features. For web docu-
ments in particular, Collins-Thompson and Callan
report that this languagemodeling-basedprediction
has a strongercorrelationwith human-assignedlev-
els than other commonlyused readabilitymeasures.
This automatic readability measure allows the sys-
tem to satisfy user-specified constraints on reading
difficulty.
We are also experimenting with using syntac-
tic features to predict reading difficulty. Heilman,
Collins-Thompson, and Eskenazi (Heilman et al.,
2008) describe an approach that combines predic-
tionsbasedonlexicalandgrammaticalfeatures. The
5www.lemurproject.org
grammatical features are frequencies of occurrence
of grammatical constructions, which are computed
fromautomaticparsesof inputtexts. Usingmultiple
measuresofreadingdifficultythatfocusondifferent
aspects of language may allow users more freedom
to find texts that match their needs. For example,
a teacher may want to find grammatically simpler
texts for use in a lesson focused on introducingdif-
ficultvocabulary.
4.2 GeneralTopicArea
A set of binary topic classifiers automatically clas-
sifies each potential reading by its general topic, as
described by Heilman, Juffs, and Eskenazi (2007).
This componentallows users to search for readings
on their general interests without specifying a par-
ticular query (e.g., “internationaltravel”) that might
unnecessarilyconstrain the results to a very narrow
topic.
A Linear Support Vector Machine text classifier
(Joachims, 1999) was trained on Web pages from
theOpenDirectoryProject(ODP)6. Thesepagesef-
fectively have human-assignedtopic labels because
they are organized into a multi-level hierarchy of
topics. The following general topics were manually
selected from categories in the ODP: Movies and
Theater; Music; Visual Arts; Computers and Tech-
nology;Business;Math,PhysicsandChemistry;Bi-
ologyandEnvironment;SocialSciences;Healthand
Medicine; Fitness and Nutrition; Religion; Politics;
LawandCrime;History;AmericanSports;andOut-
door Recreation.
Web pages from the ODP were used as gold-
standard labels in the training data for the classi-
fiers. SVM-Light (Joachims, 1999) was used as an
implementationof the SupportVector Machines. In
preliminarytests,thelinearkernelproducedslightly
6dmoz.org
82
better performancethan a radial basis function ker-
nel. Thevaluesof the decisionfunctionsof theclas-
sifiers for each topic are used to annotate readings
with their likely topics.
Thebinaryclassifiersforeachtopiccategorywere
evaluatedaccordingtotheF1measure,theharmonic
mean of precision and recall, using leave-one-out
cross-validation. Values for the F1 statistic range
from .68 to .86, with a mean value of .76 across
topics. For comparison,random guessing would be
expectedto correctlychoosethe gold-standardlabel
only ten percent of the time. During an error analy-
sis, we observed thatmany of the erroneousclassifi-
cationswere, in fact, plausiblefor a humanto make
as well. Many readings span multiple topics. For
example,a documenton a hospital merger might be
classified as “Health and Medicine” when the cor-
rect label is “Business.” In the evaluation, the gold
standard included only the single topic specified by
the ODP. The final system, however, assigns multi-
ple topic labelswhenappropriate.
4.3 Text
Quality
A major challenge of using Web documentsfor ed-
ucational applications is that many web pages con-
tain little or no text in well-formed sentences and
paragraphs. We refer to this problemas “Text Qual-
ity.” Many pages consistof lists of links, navigation
menus,multimedia,tables of numericaldata, etc. A
special annotation tool filters out such pages so that
they do not clutterup searchresultsand make it dif-
ficultfor usersto find suitablereadingmaterials.
The text quality filter estimates the proportion of
the word tokens in a pagethatare containedin well-
formedsentences. To dothisit parses theDocument
Object Model structure of the web page, and orga-
nizesit into text unitsdelineatedby the markuptags
in the document. Each new paragraph, table ele-
ment,span,ordividermarkuptagcorrespondstothe
beginning of a new text unit. The system then runs
a POS tagger7 over each text unit. We have found
that a simple check for whether the text unit con-
tains both a noun and a verb can effectively distin-
guishbetweencontenttext unitsand thosetext units
thatarejustpartoflinks,menus,etc. Theproportion
7The OpenNLP toolkit’s tagger was used
(opennlp.sourceforge.net).
of the total tokens that are part of content text units
serves as a useful measure of text quality. We have
found that a threshold of about 85% content text is
appropriate, since most web pages contain at least
some non-contenttext in links, menus,etc. This ap-
proach to content extraction is related to previous
work on increasing the accessibility of web pages
(Guptaet al., 2003).
5 ConstructingQueries
Users search for readings in the annotated corpus
through a simple interface that appears similar to,
but extends the functionality of, the interfaces for
commercial web search engines. Figure 2 shows
a screenshot of the interface. Users have the op-
tion to specify ad hoc queries in a text field. They
can also use drop down menus to specify optional
minimum and/or maximum reading levels and text
lengths. Another optional drop-down menu allows
userstoconstrainthegeneraltopicareaofresults. A
separate screen allows users to specify a list of tar-
get vocabulary words, some but not all of whichare
required to appear in the search results. For ease of
use,thetargetwordlistisstoredforanentiresession
(i.e., until the web browser application is closed)
ratherthan specifiedwith each query. After the user
submitsa query, thesystemdisplaysmultipleresults
per screenwith titles and snippets.
5.1 Ranked
versusBooleanRetrieval
In a standard boolean retrieval model, with AND as
the default operator, the results list consists of doc-
uments that contain all query terms. In conjunc-
tion with relevance ranking techniques,commercial
search engines typically use this model, a great ad-
vantageof whichis speed. Booleanretrieval canen-
counterproblemswhenquerieshavemanytermsbe-
cause every one of the terms must appear in a doc-
ument for it to be selected. In such cases, few or
no satisfactory results may be retrieved. This issue
is relevant because a teacher might want to search
for texts that contain some, but not necessarily all,
of a list of target vocabulary words. For example,
a teacher might have a list of ten words, and any
text withfive of thosewordswouldbe usefulto give
as vocabulary and reading practice. In such cases,
ranked retrieval models are more appropriate be-
83
Figure2: Screenshotof Search Interface for FindingAppropriateReadings.
cause they do not require that all of the query terms
appear. Instead,these modelsprefermultipleoccur-
rencesofdifferentwordtypesasopposedtomultiple
occurrencesofthesamewordtokens,allowingthem
to rank documents with more distinct query terms
higher than those with distinct query terms. Docu-
mentsthat containonly some of the queryterms are
thus assignednonzero weights, allowing the user to
find usefultexts that containonly someof the target
vocabulary. The REAPsearchsystemuses the Indri
Query Language’s “combine” and “weight” opera-
torsto implementa ranked retrieval modelfor target
vocabulary. For more information on text retrieval
models,see (Manninget al., 2008).
5.2 ExampleQuery
Figure 3 shows an example of a structured query
produced by the system from a teacher’s original
query and constraints. This example was slightly
altered from its original form for clarity of presen-
tation. The first line with the filrej operator filters
andrejectsany documentsthatcontainany of a long
list of words considered to be profanity, which are
omitted in the illustration for brevity and posterity.
The filreq operator in line 2 requires that all of the
constraints on reading level, text length and quality
in lines 2-4 are met. The weight operatorat the start
ofline5 balancesbetweenthead hocquerytermsin
line 5 and the user-specific target vocabulary terms
in lines 6-8. The uw10 operator on line 5 tells the
system to prefer texts where the query terms appear
together in an unordered window of size 10. Such
proximity operators cause search engines to prefer
documents in which query terms appear near each
other. The implicit assumption is that the terms in
queriessuch as “coal minerssafety”are more likely
to appear in the same sentenceor paragraphin rele-
vant documentsthan irrelevant ones, even if they do
not appear consecutively. Importantly, query terms
are separated from target words because there are
usually a much greater number of target words, and
thus combining the two sets would often result in
the query terms being ignored. The higher weight
assigned to the set of target words ensures they are
not ignored.
6 LearnerandTeacherSupport
In addition to search facilities, the system provides
extensivesupportforstudentstoreadandlearnfrom
texts as well as support for teachers to track stu-
dents’ progress. All interfaces are web-based for
easy access and portability. Teachers use the search
system to find readings, which are stored in a cur-
riculum manager that allows them to organize their
selected texts. The manager interface allows teach-
ers to perform tasks such as specifying the order
of presentation of their selected readings, choosing
target words to be highlighted in the texts to focus
learnerattention,andspecifyingtimelimitsforeach
text.
The list of available readings are shown to stu-
dents when they log in during class time or for
homework. Students select a text to read and move
on to the reading interface, which is illustrated in
Figure 4. The chosen web page is displayed in its
original format except that the original hyperlinks
and pop-ups are disabled. Target words that were
84
Figure3: ExampleStructuredQuery. The line numberson the left are for referenceonly.
chosen by the teacher are highlightedand linked to
definitions. Students may also click on any other
unknown words to access definitions. The dictio-
nary definitions are provided from the Cambridge
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary8, which is authored
specifically for ESL learners. All dictionary access
is logged, and teachers can easily see which words
studentslook up.
Thesystemalsoprovidesvocabularyexercisesaf-
ter each reading for additional practice and review
of target words. Currently, studentscompletecloze,
or fill-in-the-blank,exercisesfor eachtarget wordin
the readings. Other types of exercises are certainly
possible. For extra review, students also complete
exercises for target words from previous readings.
Students receive immediate feedback on the prac-
tice and review exercises. Currently, sets of the ex-
ercises are manually authored for each target word
and stored in a database,but we are exploringauto-
matedquestiongenerationtechniques (Brownetal.,
2005; Liu et al., 2005). At runtime, the system se-
lects practiceand review exercises from this reposi-
tory.
7 RelatedWork
A number of recent projects have taken similar ap-
proaches to providing authentic texts for language
learners. WERTi (Amaral et al., 2006) is an in-
telligent automatic workbook that uses texts from
the Web to increase knowledge of English gram-
maticalforms and functions. READ-X (Miltsakaki
and Troutt, 2007) is a tool for finding texts at spec-
ified reading levels. SourceFinder (Sheehan et al.,
2007) is an authoring tool for finding suitable texts
for standardized test items on verbal reasoning and
8dictionary.cambridge.org
readingcomprehension.
The REAP Tutor (Brown and Eskenazi, 2004;
Heilman et al., 2006) for ESL vocabulary takes a
slightly different approach. Rather than teachers
choosing texts as in the REAP Search system, the
REAP Tutor itself selects individualized practice
readingsfroma digitallibrary. Thereadingscontain
target vocabulary words that a given student needs
to learn based on a student model. While the in-
dividualizedREAP Tutor has the potential to better
match the needs of each student since each student
can work with different texts, a drawback of its ap-
proach is that instructors may have difficulty coor-
dinating group discussion about readings and inte-
gratingtheTutorintotheircurriculum.In theREAP
Search system,however, teacherscan find texts that
matchtheneedsandinterestsoftheclassasawhole.
While some degree of individualization is lost, the
advantagesofbettercoordinatedsupportfromteach-
ers and classroomintegrationare gained.
8 PilotStudy
8.1 Description
Two teachers and over fifty students in two ESL
coursesat the University of Pittsburgh used the sys-
tem as part of a pilot study in the Spring of 2008.
The courses focus on developing the reading skills
of high-intermediate ESL learners. The target vo-
cabulary words covered in the courses come from
the Academic Word List (Coxhead, 2000), a list
of broad-coverage, general purpose English words
thatfrequentlyappearinacademicwriting. Students
usedthesystemonceperweekinafifty-minuteclass
for eight weeks. For approximately half of a ses-
sion,studentsreadtheteacher-selectedreadingsand
worked through individualized practice exercises.
85
Figure4: Screenshotof Student Interface Displayinga Readingand DictionaryDefinition.
For the other half of each session, the teacher pro-
videddirectinstructionon andfacilitateddiscussion
about the texts and target words, making connec-
tions to the rest of the curriculum when possible.
For each session, the teachers found three to five
readings. Students read through at least two of the
readings, which were discussed in class. The extra
readings allowed faster readers to progress at their
own pace if they complete the first two. Teachers
learned to use the system in a training session that
lastedabout30 minutes.
8.2 UsageAnalysis
To better understand the two teachers’ interactions
with the search system, we analyzed query log data
from a four week period. In total, the teachers used
the system to select 23 readings for their students.
In the process, they issued 47 unique queries to the
system. Thus, on average they issued 2.04 queries
per chosen text. Ideally, a user would only have to
issue a single query to find useful texts, but from
the teachers’ comments it appears that the system’s
usability is sufficiently good in general. Most of
the time, they specified 20 target words, only some
of which appeared in their selected readings. The
teachers included ad hoc queries only some of the
time. These were informational in nature and ad-
dressed a variety of topics. Example queries in-
clude the following: “surviving winter”, “coal min-
ers safety”, “gender roles”, and “unidentifiedflying
objects”. The teachers chose these topics because
they matchedup withtopicsdiscussedin otherparts
of their courses’ curricula. In other cases, it was
moreimportantfor themto searchfor texts withtar-
get vocabulary rather than those on specific topics,
so they only specifiedtarget words and pedagogical
constraints.
8.3 Post-testandSurvey Results
At theendof thesemester, studentstookan exit sur-
vey followed by a post-test consisting of cloze vo-
cabulary questions for the target words they prac-
ticed with the system. In previous semesters, the
REAPTutorhasbeenusedinoneofthetwo courses
that were part of the pilot study. For comparison
withthoseresults,we focusour analysison the sub-
set of data for the 20 students in that course. The
exit survey results, shown in 5, indicate that stu-
dents felt it was easy-to-use and should be used in
futureclasses. Thesesurveyresultsareactuallyvery
similarto previousresultsfroma Spring2006study
with the REAP Tutor (Heilman et al., 2006). How-
ever, responses to the prompt “My teacher helped
me to learn by discussing the readings after I read
86
Figure5: The resultsfrom the pilot study exit survey, which used a Likert responseformatfrom 1-5 with 1=Strongly
Disagree,3=NeitherAgreenor Disagree,and 5=StronglyAgree. Errorbars indicatestandarddeviations.
them” suggest that the tight integration of an edu-
cational system with other classroom activities, in-
cludingteacher-led discussions,can be beneficial.
Learning of target words was directly measured
by the post-test. On average, students answered
89% of cloze exercises correctly, compared to less
than 50% in previous studies with the REAP Tutor.
A direct comparisonto those studies is challenging
since the system in this study provided instruction
on words that studentswere also studyingas part of
their regular coursework, whereas systems in previ-
ous studiesdid not.
9 DiscussionandFuture
Work
We have described a system that enables teachers
to find appropriate, authentic texts from the Web
for vocabulary and reading practice. A variety of
languagetechnologiesrangingfrom text retrieval to
POS tagging perform essential functionsin the sys-
tem. The system has been used in two courses by
over fifty ESL students.
A number of questions remain. Can language
learnerseffectivelyandefficientlyusesucha system
to search for reading materials directly, rather than
reading what a teacher selects? Students could use
the system, but a more polished user interface and
furtherprogresson filteringout readingsof low text
quality is necessary. Is such an approach adaptable
to otherlanguages,especiallylesscommonlytaught
languages for which there are fewer available Web
pages? Certainlytherearesufficientresourcesavail-
ableontheWebincommonlytaughtlanguagessuch
as French or Japanese, but extending to other lan-
guages with fewer resources might be significantly
more challenging. How effective would such a tool
be in a first languageclassroom? Such an approach
should be suitable for use in first language class-
rooms,especiallyby teacherswho need to find sup-
plementalmaterialsforstrugglingreaders. Arethere
enoughhigh-quality, low-readingleveltextsforvery
young readers? From observations made while de-
velopingREAP, the proportionof Web pages below
fourth grade reading level is small. Finding appro-
priate materialsfor beginningreadersis a challenge
that the REAPdevelopersare actively addressing.
Issues of speed and scale are also important to
consider. Complex queries such as the one shown
in Figure 3 are not as efficient as boolean queries.
The currentsystemtakes a few secondsto returnre-
sults from its database of several million readings.
Scaling up to a much larger digital library may re-
quiresophisticateddistributed processingof queries
across multiple disks or multiple servers. However,
we maintain that this is an effective approach for
providing texts within a particulargrade level range
or known target word list.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by the Insti-
tute of EducationSciences,U.S. Departmentof Ed-
ucation, through Grant R305B040063 to Carnegie
Mellon University; Dept. of Education grant
R305G03123; the Pittsburgh Science of Learning
Center which is funded by the National Science
Foundation,awardnumberSBE-0354420;andaNa-
tional Science Foundation Graduate Research Fel-
lowship awarded to the first author. Any opin-
ions,findings,conclusions,or recommendationsex-
pressed in this material are the authors, and do not
necessarilyreflectthoseof the sponsors.
References
Luiz Amaral, Vanessa Metcalf and Detmar Meurers.
87
2006. Language Awareness through Re-use of NLP
Technology. Pre-conference Workshop on NLP in
CALL – Computational and Linguistic Challenges.
CALICO2006.
Jon Brown and Maxine Eskenazi. 2004. Retrieval of
authentic documents for reader-specific lexical prac-
tice. Proceedings of InSTIL/ICALLSymposium 2004.
Venice,Italy.
Jon Brown, Gwen Frishkoff, and Maxine Eskenazi.
2005. Automatic question generation for vocabulary
assessment. Proceedingsof HLT/EMNLP2005. Van-
couver, B.C.
Kevyn Collins-Thompson and Jamie Callan. 2005.
Predicting reading difficulty with statistical language
models. Journal of the AmericanSociety for Informa-
tion Scienceand Technology, 56(13). pp. 1448-1462.
Averil Coxhead. 2000. A New Academic Word List.
TESOLQuarterly, 34(2). pp. 213-238.
S. Gupta, G. Kaiser, D. Neistadt, and P. Grimm. 2003.
DOM-based content extraction of HTML documents.
ACM Press,New York.
F. M. Hafiz and Ian Tudor. 1989. Extensive reading
and the development of language skills. ELT Journal
43(1):4-13. OxfordUniversityPress.
MichaelHeilman,KevynCollins-Thompson,MaxineEs-
kenazi. 2008. An Analysis of Statistical Models and
Features for Reading Difficulty Prediction. The 3rd
Workshopon InnovativeUseof NLPforBuildingEdu-
cational Applications. Associationfor Computational
Linguistics.
Michael Heilman, Alan Juffs, Maxine Eskenazi. 2007.
Choosing Reading Passages for Vocabulary Learning
byTopictoIncreaseIntrinsicMotivation. Proceedings
of the 13th InternationalConferenced on ArtificialIn-
telligence in Education. Marinadel Rey, CA.
Michael Heilman, Kevyn Collins-Thompson, Jamie
Callan, and Maxine Eskenazi. 2006. Classroom suc-
cessof an IntelligentTutoringSystemforlexicalprac-
tice and reading comprehension. Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Spoken Language
Processing. Pittsburgh, PA.
Thorsten Joachims. 1999. Making large-Scale SVM
Learning Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods -
Support Vector Learning, B. Schlkopf and C. Burges
and A. Smola(ed.) MIT-Press.
Chao-Lin Liu, Chun-Hung Wang, Zhao-Ming Gao, and
Shang-Ming Huang. 2005. Applications of Lexical
Informationfor AlgorithmicallyComposing Multiple-
Choice Cloze Items Proceedings of the Second
Workshop on Building Educational Applications Us-
ing NLP. Associationfor Computational Linguistics.
Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan and Hin-
rich Schtze. 2008. Introduction to Information Re-
trieval. Cambridge University Press. Draft available
at http://www-csli.stanford.edu/∼hinrich/information-
retrieval-book.html.
Eleni Miltsakakiand Audrey Troutt. 2007. Read-X:Au-
tomaticEvaluationof ReadingDifficultyof Web Text.
Proceedingsof E-Learn 2007, sponsored by the Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Computing in Educa-
tion. Quebec,Canada.
Matthew Peacock. 1997. The effect of authentic mate-
rials on the motivation of EFL learners. ELT Journal
51(2):144-156. OxfordUniversityPress.
Kathleen M. Sheehan, Irene Kostin, Yoko Futagi. 2007.
SourceFinder: A Construct-Driven Approach for Lo-
cating Appropriately Targeted Reading Comprehen-
sion Source Texts. Proceedings of the SLaTE Work-
shop on Speech and Language Technology in Educa-
tion. Carnegie Mellon University and International
SpeechCommunicationAssociation(ISCA).
88

