Proceedings of the Third ACL Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications, pages 36–43,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
An AnnotatedCorpus OutsideIts OriginalContext: A Corpus-Based
Exercise Book
BarboraHladk´a and Ondˇrej Kuˇcera
Instituteof Formaland AppliedLinguistics,CharlesUniversity
Malostransk´e n´am. 25
118 00 Prague
CzechRepublic
hladka@ufal.mff.cuni.cz, ondrej.kucera@centrum.cz
Abstract
We present the STYX system, which is de-
signed as an electronic corpus-basedexercise
book of Czech morphology and syntax with
sentences directly selected from the Prague
Dependency Treebank, the largest annotated
corpus of the Czech language. The exercise
bookofferscomplex sentenceprocessingwith
respect to both morphological and syntactic
phenomena, i.e. the exercises allow students
of basic and secondary schools to practice
classifyingpartsof speechandparticularmor-
phologicalcategoriesofwordsandinthepars-
ing of sentences and classifying the syntactic
functions of words. The corpus-based exer-
cise book presents a novel usage of annotated
corporaoutsidetheir originalcontext.
1 Introduction
Schoolchildrencanusea computertochatwiththeir
friends, to play games, to draw, to browse the Inter-
netor to writetheirownblogswhy shouldthey not
use it to parse sentences or to determine the mor-
phological categories of words? We do not expect
themto practicegrammaras enthusiasticallyas they
do what is mentioned above, but we believe that an
electronic exercise book could make the practicing,
whichthey need to do anyway, more fun.
We present the procedure of building an exercise
book of the Czech language based on the Prague
Dependency Treebank. First (in Section 2) we
presentthe motivation for buildingan exercisebook
of Czech morphology and syntax based on an an-
notated corpus – the Prague Dependency Treebank
(PDT). Then we provide a short description of the
PDT itself in Section 3. Section 4 is the core of
our paper. Section 4.1 is devoted to the filtering of
the PDT sentences in such a way that the complex-
ity of sentences included in the exercise book ex-
actlycorrespondsto thecomplexityof sentencesex-
ercised in traditional Czech textbooks and exercise
books. Section4.2 documentsthe transformationof
the sentences – more precisely a transformation of
their annotationsinto the school analysis scheme as
recommended by the official framework of the ed-
ucational programme for general secondary educa-
tion(Jeˇr´abekandTup´y,2005). Theevaluationofthe
system is described in Section 4.3. Section 5 sum-
marizesthis paperand plans for the futurework.
2 Motivation
From the very beginning, we had an idea of us-
ing an annotatedcorpus outside its original context.
We recalled our experience from secondary school,
namely from language lessons when we learned
morphologyandsyntax. We didit ”withpenandpa-
per” and more or less hated it. Thus we decided to
build an electronic exercise book to learn and prac-
tice the morphologyand the syntax ”by moving the
mousearoundthe screen.”
In principle, there are two ways to build an ex-
ercise book manually or automatically. A manual
procedure requires collecting sentences the authors
usuallymake up and then processwith regard to the
chosen aspects. This is a very demanding, time-
consuming task and therefore the authors manage
to collectonlytens(possiblyhundreds)of sentences
that simply cannot fully reflect the real usage of a
language. An automaticprocedureis possiblewhen
an annotated corpus of the language is available.
Thenthedisadvantagesofthemanualproceduredis-
36
appear. It is expected that the texts in a corpus are
already selected to provide a well-balanced corpus
reflectingtherealusageofthelanguage,thehardan-
notation work is also done and the size of such cor-
pus is thousands or tens of thousands of annotated
sentences. The task that remains is to transformthe
annotation scheme used in the corpus into the sen-
tence analysis scheme that is taught in schools. In
fact, a procedure based on an annotated corpus that
we apply is semi-automatic, since the annotation
scheme transformationpresents a knowledge-based
process designed manually no machine-learning
techniqueis used.
We browsed the Computer-Assisted Language
Learning (CALL) approaches, namely those con-
centrated under the teaching and language cor-
pora interest group (e.g. (Wichmann and Fligel-
stone (eds.), 1997), (Tribble, 2001), (Murkherjee,
2004), (Schultze, 2003), (Scott, Tribble, 2006)).
We realized that none of them actually employs
manually annotated corpora – they use corpora as
huge banks of texts without additional linguistic
information (i.e. without annotation). Only one
project(Keogh et al., 2004) works with an automat-
ically annotated corpus to teach Irish and German
morphology.
Reviewing the Czech electronic exercise books
available (e.g. (Terasoft, Ltd., 2003)), none of them
provides the users with any possibilityof analyzing
thesentencebothmorphologicallyandsyntactically.
All of them were built manually.
Considering all the facts mentioned above, we
find our approach to be novel one. One of the most
exciting aspects of corpora is that they may be used
to a good advantage both in research and teach-
ing. That is why we wanted to present this system
thatmakesschoolchildrenfamiliarwithanacademic
product. At the same time, this system represents a
challengeand an opportunityfor academicsto pop-
ularizeafieldwithapromisingfuturethatisdevoted
to naturallanguageprocessing.
3 The
PragueDependencyTreebank
The Prague Dependency Treebank (PDT) presents
thelargestannotatedcorpusofCzech,anditssecond
editionwas publishedin 2006(PDT2.0, 2006). The
PDT had arisen from the tradition of the successful
Prague School of Linguistics. The dependency ap-
proach to syntactic analysis with the main role of
a verb has been applied. The annotations go from
the morphological layer through to the intermedi-
ate syntactic-analyticallayer to the tectogrammati-
cal layer (the layer of an underlyingsyntacticstruc-
ture). The texts have been annotated in the same
direction, i.e. from the simplest layer to the most
complex. This fact correspondswith the amount of
data annotatedon each level – 2 millionwords have
been annotated on the lowest morphological layer,
1.5millionwordsonboththemorphologicalandthe
syntactic layer, and 0.8 million words on all three
layers.
Within the PDT conceptual framework, a sen-
tenceis representedas a rootedorderedtree with la-
beled nodes and edges on both syntactic (Hajiˇcov´a,
Kirschner and Sgall, 1999) and tectogrammatical
(Mikulov´a et al., 2006)layers. Thuswe speakabout
syntactic and tectogrammatical trees, respectively.
Representationon the morphologicallayer (Hana et
al., 2005) corresponds to a list of (word token and
morphological tag) pairs. Figure 1 illustrates the
syntactic and morphologicalannotationof the sam-
ple sentence Rozd´ıl do regulovan´e ceny byl hrazen
z dotac´ı. [The variation of the regulated price was
madeupbygrants.] Onetokenofthemorphological
layer is represented by exactly one node of the tree
(rozd´ıl [variation], do [of], regulovan´e [regulated],
ceny [price], byl [was], hrazen [made up], z [by],
dotac´ı [grants], ‘.’) and the dependency relation be-
tween two nodes is captured by an edge between
them, i.e. between the dependent and its governor.
The actual type of the relation is given as a func-
tion label of the edge, for example the edge (rozd´ıl,
hrazen) is labeledby the functionSb (subject)of the
node rozd´ıl. Together with a syntactic function, a
morphologicaltagisdisplayed(rozd´ıl, NNIS1-----A-
---).
Since there is m:n correspondence between the
number of nodes in syntactic and tectogrammati-
cal trees, it would be rather confusing to display
the annotations on those layers all together in one
tree. Hence we provide a separate tree visualizing
the tectogrammaticalannotation of the sample sen-
tence – see Figure 2. A tectogrammatical lemma
and a functor are relevant to our task, thus we dis-
play them with each node in the tectogrammatical
37
 D  F P S U          S   V 
 $ X [ 6
 5 R ] G t O 1 1 , 6       $    
 6 E
 G R 5 5             
 $ X [ 3
 U H J X O R Y D Q p $ $ ) 6       $    
 $ W U
 F H Q \ 1 1 ) 6       $    
 $ W U
 E \ O 9 S < 6    ; 5  $ $   
 $ X [ 9
 K U D ] H Q 9 V < 6    ; ;  $ 3   
 3 U H G
 ] 5 5             
 $ X [ 3
 G R W D F t 1 1 ) 3       $    
 $ G Y
  =              
 $ X [ .
Figure1: A PDT syntactictree of the sentenceRozd´ıl do
regulovan´e ceny byl hrazen z dotac´ı.
tree, e.g. (hradit, PRED).
Inthefollowingtext,wewillbeusingthetermthe
PDT approach when having in mind the conceptual
framework of PDT annotation, and the school ap-
proach when having in mind the conceptual frame-
workofa sentenceanalysisasit is taughtin schools.
4 Exercise
book composition
With regards to our idea, the electronic exercise
book is an electronicsystemthat consistsof
• a databaseof sentenceswith their morphologi-
cal and syntacticanalysesautomaticallygener-
ated from an annotatedcorpus,
• a user interface
– toselectsentencesfromthedatabaseor, in
other words, to composethe exercises,
– to simultaneously analyze the selected
sentences both morphologically and syn-
tactically,
roott-cmpr9410-049-p74s3
rozdílPAT
cenaRSTR
regulovanýRSTR
#GenACT
hraditPRED
dotaceMEANS
Figure 2: A PDT tectogrammatical tree of the sentence
Rozd´ıl do regulovan´e ceny byl hrazen z dotac´ı.
– to checkthe analyses.
More specifically, the composition of the PDT-
based exercise book of Czech morphologyand syn-
tax implies the selection of those sentences from
PDTthatareannotatedmorphologicallyandsyntac-
tically. However, there emerge some syntactic phe-
nomena that are handled differently in the PDT ap-
proach than in the school approach. The data an-
notated tectogrammaticallyhas to be taken into ac-
count to process these phenomena properly. Given
that, the data annotated on all three layers (0.8 mil-
lion words in 49,442 sentences) become the candi-
date set of sentences from which the exercise book
is to be composed.
Unfortunately, the sentences from the candidate
set cannot be merely taken as they are because of
two factors:
• the complexity of sentences in the PDT goes
38
beyond the complexity of sentences in text-
books;
• some syntactic phenomena are handled differ-
ently in the PDT approach than in the school
approach.
This means that some of the sentences have to
be completelydiscarded(sentencefiltering,see 4.1)
and syntactic trees of the remaining sentences have
to be transformed to match the school analysis of
syntax (see 4.2). Luckily, the school approach to
the morphologydoes not coincidewith the PDT ap-
proach. Therefore the PDT morphological annota-
tions do not need any special handling. It is impos-
sible to browse the candidate set of sentences man-
ually with regard to its volume. Both sentence fil-
tering and annotation transformationmust be done
automatically. The whole process is shown in Fig-
ure 3.
To summarize, our work on the electronic ex-
ercise book covers the data and the software
components ((Hladk´a, Kuˇcera, 2005), (Kuˇcera,
2006),(STYX,2008)):
• Annotated Sentence Database Almost 12,000
annotatedsentencesgeneratedbytheFilterSen-
tencescomponent.
• FilterSentences. A component used to prepare
theannotatedsentencedatabasesuitableforus-
age in the exercise book. The end user will
never have to use this.
• Charon. An administrative tool, used for view-
ing all of the available sentences and for com-
posing the exercises. We assume that mostly
teacherswill use it.
• Styx. Theelectronicexercisebookitself. Ituses
the exercises composed with Charon. An ac-
tive sentenceis analyzedboth morphologically
and syntactically as shown in Figure 4. Dur-
ing the morphologicalanalysis,the user moves
wordbyword,andforeachwordselectsitspart
of speech. According to the selected part of
speech, the combo boxes for the relevant mor-
phological categories appear and let the user
choose one of several choices they consider
the proper one. During the syntactic analy-
sis, the user moves nodes using the traditional
drag and drop method to catch the dependent-
governor relation. Afterwards, the syntactic
functions are assigned, technically via pop-up
menus. Oncethe analysesare finished,the cor-
rect answers are provided separately for mor-
phologyand syntax.
4.1 Sentencefiltering
Thecandidatesetconsistsofmanysentencesthatare
not appropriatefor schoolchildrento analyze. They
contain phenomena that authors of textbooks either
do not consider at all or sometimes do not agree
upon. The following seven filtering criteria have
been formulated to exclude problematic sentences.
For each filter, we provide a brief description.
1. SimpleSentences. The most complex filter that
excludescompoundand complex sentences.
2. GraphicalSymbols. Excludes sentences with
various graphical symbols (except for the dot
sign) because they imply more complex phe-
nomenathan the schoolanalysesoperatewith.
3. EllipsisApposition. Excludes sentences con-
tainingan ellipsisor an apposition.
4. OnePredicate. Excludes sentences without a
predicate(sentenceswith more than one predi-
cateare alreadyexcludedby SimpleSentences).
5. LessThanNWords. Excludes sentences that are
too long.
6. MoreThanNWords. Excludessentencesthatare
too short (usuallysimpleheadlines).
7. AuxO. Excludes sentences containing emotio-
nal, rhythmic particles carrying the AuxO syn-
tactic function.
The filters were appliedin the same order as they
arelistedabove. FirstthefilterSimpleSentenceswas
applied on the candidate set of sentences. Then the
sentences preserved by this filter were filtered by
GraphicalSymbols, and so on. Table 1 provides an
overall quantitative overview of sentence filtering –
for illustration, the most complex filter SimpleSen-
tences excludedthe highest percentageof sentences
39
Figure3: Exercisebook composition
(54.4%). As it is highlighted in the last row of the
table, almost 12,000 sentenceswere preserved after
processingthe candidateset with all the filters.
Filter # input # preserved
sentences sentences(%)
SimpleSentence 49,442 22,552(45.6)
GraphicalSymbols 22,552 20,384(90.4)
EllipsisAposition 20,383 13,633(66.9)
OnePredicate 13,633 13,617(99.9)
LessThanNWords 13,617 13,010(95.5)
MoreThanNWords 13,010 11,718(90.1)
AuxO 11,718 11,705(99.9)
overall 49,442 11,718(23.7)
Table 1: Quantitative overview of sentencefiltering
4.2 Annotationtransformation
In the school approach,a sentence is representedas
a tree-like structurewithlabelednodes. Unlike PDT
syntactictrees,the structuresof the schoolapproach
have no root node or, in another point of view have
two roots: a subject and a predicate (see Figure 5 –
rozd´ıl, byl hrazen respectively).
Besidesthe above-mentioneddifferencein analy-
sis schemes,thePDTandtheschoolapproachdiffer
in the following aspects:
• Many of the PDT syntactic functions do not
have counterpartsin the schoolapproach.
• The school approach does not have the direct
1:1 correspondencebetweennodes of the mor-
phological layer and the syntactic layer, i.e.
a node can contain more than just one word
as visible in Figure 5 – the pair of words byl,
hrazen form one node as well as the pair z,
dotac´ı. The words inside each node are listed
in accordance to the surface word order of the
sentence.
With regardsto the discusseddifferences,we sys-
tematicallywentthroughthe PDTannotationguide-
lines (Hajiˇcov´a, Kirschner and Sgall, 1999), ana-
lyzed all specified phenomena and designed their
transformations into the school analysis scheme.
Three elementary operations on syntactic trees and
the rulesmappingsyntacticfunctionshave beenfor-
mulated. Then a transformation is understood as a
sequenceof these operationsand mappingrules.
1. JoinTheParentNode The words at the node are
moveduptotheparentnodeandallchildnodes
ofthegivennodebecomethechildnodesofthe
parentnode. The node is removed afterwards.
40
Figure4: Styx—practicing
2. AbsorbTheChildNodes The words at all child
nodesofthenodearemovedintothenode. The
child nodes are removed and their child nodes
become the child nodes of the node. This op-
eration is equivalent to the JoinTheParentNode
operationappliedtoallchildnodesofthenode.
3. RemoveTheNodeThe node-leave is removed.
Mapping PDT syntactic functions follows these
operations on trees. Given the complexity of syn-
tactic phenomena and the differences between the
approaches, it is not possible to map all functions
in a straightforward way as is evident from Table 2.
While the school approach works with seven syn-
tactic functions (listed in the second column) the
PDT approach labels with 25 functions1 (listed in
the first column). The PDT functionsindicating the
subject, the predicate, the attribute and the adver-
bial (in italics) are simply mapped to their school
counterparts. The other functions are changed into
the school functions in accordance with the type of
operation the nodes they belong to pass. After the
AbsorbTheChildNodesoperation,thenodeismostly
labeledby the direct schoolcounterpart of its ”most
important child node”, i.e. the child node bearing
one of the simply-mappedfunctions,vaguelynoted.
After the JoinTheParentNode operation, the parent
1Thetotalnumberof thePDTsyntacticfunctionsis actually
higher. Here we list those functions that appear in sentences
includedin the exercisebook.
node does not changeits functionin most cases.
PDT school description
syntactic syntactic
functions functions
Pred Pˇrs predicate
Pnom Pˇrj predicate
nominal
Sb Po subject
Obj Pt object
Atr, AtrAdv, AdvAtr, Pk attribute
AtrAtr, AtrObj,
ObjAtr
Adv, Atv, AtvV Pu adverbial
Obj D complement
Coord — coordination
AuxC,AuxP, AuxZ, — auxiliary
AuxO,AuxV, AuxR, sentence
AuxY, AuxK,AuxX, members
AuxG
Table 2: Schoolvs. PDT syntactic functions
For illustration, a PDT syntactic tree in Figure 1
is transformed into a school structure displayed in
Figure 5. Needed transformations include, for ex-
ample. mergingthenodes(do,AuxP)and(ceny, Atr)
intothenode(doceny, Pk)orsimilarlymerging(byl,
AuxV) and (hrazen, Pred) into (byl hrazen, Pˇrs).
4.3 Evaluation
It is always difficult to evaluate such systems. It is
impossibleto expressthe qualityof our systemwith
41
Figure 5: A school syntactic tree of the sentence Rozd´ıl
do regulovan´e ceny byl hrazen z dotac´ı.
numerical figures only. The only number we can
provide presents the sentence count included in the
exercise book: We believe that almost 12,000 sen-
tences bring enormousdiversity to the practicingof
morphologyand syntax.
To find out the real value of our system, we pre-
sented it to two different audiences. First we pre-
sented it to academics, who really appreciated the
ideaof corpusassimilationformorphologyandsyn-
tax learning in schools. Their discussions were
mainly concerned with the transformationof anno-
tations.
Then we presented the exercise book during
Czech classes in secondary schools. We found out
that both the teachers and the students were imme-
diatelyable to use the systemand they were excited
aboutit. They agreedthat suchexerciseswouldbe a
nice addition to their classes. Given the experience
we acquired during the presentations, we created a
sample class (a methodologicalguide) for teachers,
and we collected some interesting ideas that may
help us improve the system. These improvements
concern i) the annotation transformations(1, 2, 3);
ii) the variety of exercises (4); iii) the user interface
(5):
1. We do not distinguish between the different
types of adverbials. Thus we will provide the
possibility of marking a node as being a place
adverbialor time adverbialetc.
2. We do not distinguish concordant and discor-
dant attributes yet.
3. Dealing with coordination needs revision, es-
peciallywhen it comes to a differencebetween
dependentsof the coordinationas a whole and
dependentsof membersof the coordination.
4. • During the morphological analysis, the
user selects only the part of speech of the
given word and STYX itself provides the
relevant morphologicalcategories to ana-
lyze. In this fashion, the exercises are too
simplistic. To master the morphology, the
user mustknow whichcategoriesare rele-
vant to the given part of speech.
• The Charon module will give the user
the optionof selectingsentencesthat con-
tain some specific phenomena. Cur-
rently, an administrator goes through all
the sentences ”manually” and if they ful-
fillher/hisselectioncriteria,(s)heincludes
them in the exercises.
5. Theuserinterfacehastobechangedtobemore
”crazy,” or dynamic,to attractnot onlythe ”A”
pupils but the rest of them as well. Much more
comfortable controls, for example by adding
keyboard shortcuts for the most common ac-
tions,will be offered too.
5 Conclusion
The PDT-basedexercisebook has completedits ini-
tial steps. The theoretical aspects have been ana-
lyzed,thesystemhasbeenimplementedanddemon-
stratedto schoolchildren.Theirfeedbacksmotivates
us to improve the system in such a way that it will
becomea real educationaltool.
References
Hana Jiˇr´ı and Dan Zeman and Hana Hanov´a and Jan
Hajiˇc and Barbora Hladk´a and Emil Jeˇr´abek. 2005.
A Manualfor MorphologicalAnnotation,2nd edition.
´UFAL Technical Report27, Prague,CzechRepublic.
Hajiˇcov´a Eva and Zdenˇek Kirschner and Petr Sgall.
1999. A Manualfor AnalyticLayer Annotationof the
Prague Dependency Treebank (English translation).
´UFAL Technical Report, Prague,CzechRepublic.
42
Hladk´a Barbora and Ondˇrej Kuˇcera. 2005. Prague De-
pendency Treebank as an exercise book of Czech. In
ProceedingsofHLT/EMNLP2005InteractiveDemon-
strations, pp. 14-15. Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
Jeˇr´abek Jaroslav and Jan Tup´y 2005. The official frame-
work educational programme for general secondary
education. Researchpedagogicalinstitute, Prague.
KeoghKatrinaandThomasKollerandMonicaWard and
Elaine U´ıDhonnchadhaand Josef van Genabith 2004.
CL for CALL in the Primary School. In Proceed-
ingsof the InternationalWorkshop in Associationwith
COLING2004, Geneva, Switzerland.
Kuˇcera Ondˇrej. 2006. Praˇzsk´y z´avislostn´ı korpus jako
cviˇcebnice jazyka ˇcesk´eho. Master thesis. Charles
University, Prague,CzechRepublic.
Mikulov´a Marie et al. 2006. A Manual for Tectogram-
matic Layer Annotation of the Prague Dependency
Treebank. ´UFAL Technical Report, Prague, Czech
Republic.
Mukherjee, J. 2004. Bridging the gap between ap-
plied corpus linguistics and the reality of English lan-
guage teaching in Germany. In U. Connor and T. Up-
ton (eds.) Applied Corpus Linguistics: A Multidimen-
sionalPerspective. Amsterdam: Rodopi, pp.239-250.
PDT 2.0 [online]. 2006. Prague Dependency Treebank,
2nd edition. http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/pdt2.0
Scott Mike and Christopher Tribble 2006. Textual Pat-
terns: keyword and corpus analysis in language edu-
cation. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schultze Mathias 2003. AI in CALL: Artficially Inated
or Almost Imminent? In Proceedings of the World-
CALL Conference, Banff, Canada.
STYX [online]. 2008. The STYX electronic exercise
book of Czech http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/styx
Terasoft,Ltd. 2003. TS ˇCesk´y jazyk2 jazykov´e rozbory.
http://www.terasoft.cz.
Tribble Christopher 2001 Corpora and teaching: ad-
justing the gaze. In Proceedings of the ICAME 2001
Conference, Louvain, Belgium.
Wichmann Anne and Steven Fligelstone (eds.) 1997.
Teaching and Language Corpora (AppliedLinguistics
and Language London: AddisonWesley Longman.
43

