BioNLP 2008: Current Trends in Biomedical Natural Language Processing, pages 102–103,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Maping Clinical Notes to Medical Terminology at Point of Care 
Yefeng Wang 
School of Information Technologies 
University of Sydney 
New South Wales 2006, Australia 
ywang1@it.usyd.edu.au 
Jon Patrick 
School of Information Technologies 
University of Sydney 
New South Wales 2006, Australia 
jonpat@it.usyd.edu.au 
 
 
Abstract 
Clinicians write the reports in natural lan-
guage which contains a large amount of in-
formal medical term. Automating conver-
sion of text into clinical terminologies al-
lows reliable retrieval and analysis of the 
clinical notes. We have created an algor-
ithm that maps medical expresions in 
clinical notes into a medical terminology. 
This algorithm indexes medical terms into 
an augmented lexicon. It performs lexical 
searches in text and finds the longest pos-
sible matches in the target terminology, 
SNOMED CT. The maping system was 
run on a colection of 470,00 clinical 
notes from an Intensive Care Service (ICS). 
The evaluation on a smal part of the cor-
pus shows the precision is 70.4%. 
1 Introduction

A substantial amount of clinical data is locked 
away in a non-standardised form of clinical lan-
guage which if standardised could be usefuly 
mined to gain greater understanding of patient care 
and the progresion of diseases. Clinical notes on a 
patient's health are writen in natural language 
which contains a great deal of formal terminology 
but used in an informal and unorderly maner. 
These medical notes ned to be converted to a 
formal terminology to enable acurate retrieval and 
to compile agregated statistics of the medical care. 
To satisfy these neds, we developed a medical 
concept identifier that is able to identify concepts 
in clinical notes and maped to medical codes in a 
terminology. The algorithm has ben implemented 
to tag medical concepts in a colection of 470,00 
clinical notes from an Intensive Care Service. A 
total of 9,135,00 instances of about 20,00 medi-
cal concepts were identified. These medical con-
cepts are used to study the medical language used 
by Intensive Care clinical staf, and the identified 
concepts are used to index patient clinical records 
for targeted information retrieval activities. 
2 Related
Work 
There has ben a large efort spent on automatic 
recognition of medical and biomedical concepts 
and maping them to medical terminology.  The 
Unified Medical Language System Meta-thesaurus 
(UMLS) is the world's largest medical knowledge 
source and it has ben the focus of much research. 
One of the prominent systems to map fre text to 
UMLS are MetaMap (Aronson, 201), 
3 Constructing
the Lexicon 
The Augmented Lexicon is a data structure devel-
oped to kep track of the words that apear in the 
concepts of the medical terminology. The Aug-
mented Lexicon is built from the individual words 
in the glos or the definition of the medical term. 
For example, Myocardial Infarction has the atomic 
words Myocardial and Infarction. Each concept is 
normalised which includes removal of stop words, 
steming, and speling variation generation. For 
each word, a list of the concept ids that contain that 
word is stored in the Augmented Lexicon. An ad-
ditional table is stored alongside the augmented 
lexicon, caled the “atomic term count” to record 
the number of atomic terms that comprise each 
description. 
102
4 Token
Matching Algorithm 
The algorithm performs string alignment betwen 
the source text and a target medical terminology. 
The best matches are determined by scoring algor-
ithms for both perfect matching and partial match-
ing. To find al posible matches, the algorithm 
iteratively performs matches for sub-strings using 
dynamic programing, so that the algorithm 
doesn’t have to generate al combination of sub-
strings for the input sentence. Each previously 
computed substrings matches are stored and in a 
matching matrix so don’t require recalculation. 
 
 
The data stored in each cel is a list of medical 
term ids that are in al the tokens that comprise the 
cel. The score is then calculated using the "atomic 
term count", which stores the number of tokens 
that make up that term. The score is the number of 
tokens in the curent cel that have the term id in 
comon divided by the number of tokens in the 
ful description. 
5 Recognition
of Clinical Entities 
Before medical term identification, Clinical enti-
ties such as measurement, demography, quantities 
are recognised and normalised to their clases. 
 
Entity Clas Examples 
Blod Presure 105m of Hg 
Demography 69 year-old man 
Datetime 20/1 2030 
Quantity 5 m 
 
Table 1. Clinical Entities and Examples 
6 Evaluation

The token matching algorithm has ben imple-
mented as a module in a terminology server that 
can provide real time text to medical concept en-
coding. The system was instaled in the Intensive 
Care Service that provides web interfaces for users 
to submit clinical notes and it computed SNOMED 
CT codes in real-time. The web interface has ben 
implemented in several clinical forms templates at 
the RPAH, alowing data to be captured as the doc-
tors fil in these forms. A fedback form has ben 
implemented alowing clinicians to submit com-
ments, identify terms that are mised by the system 
and submit corections to incorectly labeled terms. 
This was sen as a rare oportunity to colect an 
expert corected corpus of clinical notes. Unfortu-
nately, there was litle adherence to the corection 
part of the program and so we do not yet have suf-
ficient material to be precise about recal values. 
To evaluate the acuracy our systems, we col-
lected a set of bedside clinical notes of patient 
monitoring chart information. 487 documents and 
4,054 medical concepts were taged with 
SNOMED CT codes and have ben evaluated by 
medical experts. There are 2,852 corectly identi-
fied concepts and 1,202 incorectly identified con-
cepts, results in a precision rate of 70.4%. The re-
cal rate hasn’t ben fuly evaluated. 
7 Conclusions

In conclusion, we have proposed a system to 
find medical terms in fre text clinical notes and 
map them into a medical terminology. We have 
implemented the algorithm as a web-service sys-
tem. The algorithm uses an augmented lexicon to 
index concept descriptors in SNOMED CT, which 
alow a much faster maping of longest spaning 
concepts in the system than a naïve word searching 
aproach, which can then create more efective 
information retrieval and information extraction. 
References 
Aronson, A. R. (201). Efective maping of biomedical 
text to the UMLS Metathesaurus: the MetaMap pro-
gram. Proc AIA Symp 17: 21. 
 
Figure 1: Token Matching Matrix 
A AB ABC ABCD 
 B BC BCD 
  C CD 
   D List of ids 
whose term 
contains BCD 
Term 3 
Term 4 
Term 5 
… 
List of ids 
whose term 
contains AB 
Term 1 
Term 2 
y0 
y1 
y2 
y3 
x0 x1 x2 x3 
103

