Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 96–99,
Columbus, June 2008. c©2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
Quantifying Elipsis in Dialogue: 
an index of mutual understanding 
 
 
Marcus Colman, Arash Eshghi and Patrick G. T. Healey 
Interaction, Media and Communication Research Group 
Queen Mary, University of London 
E1 4NS UK 
{marcus, arash, ph}@dcs.qmul.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a coding protocol that al-
lows naïve users to anotate dialogue tran-
scripts for anaphora and elipsis. Cohen's 
kapa statistic demonstrates that the protocol 
is suficiently robust in terms of reliability. It 
is proposed that quantitative elipsis data may 
be used as an index of mutual-engagement. 
Curent and potential uses of elipsis coding 
are described. 
1. Introduction 
Spontaneously generated dialogue, whether natu-
rally occurring or task-oriented, rarely sticks to 
accepted rules of grammar or even politeness. In-
terruptions, ungrammatical uterances and grunts 
or other noises are found in the majority of contri-
butions in dialogue corpora. One reason for this is 
the ubiquitous use of ellipsis; the omision of 
words or phrases from a contribution which can be 
inferred or extracted from previous contributions. 
Elipsis is optional; the ful constituent could serve 
communication as well as the elliptical version. 
Where ellipsis occurs acros speakers i.e., one par-
ticipant makes (elliptical) use of another’s contri-
bution, it provides a direct index of the mutual-
accessibility of the current conversational context 
(cf. Healey et. al. 207; Eshghi and Healey, 207). 
  In some cases elliptical contributions are obvi-
ous, as in the polar response 'yeah', signifying that 
a question has been heard, understod and consid-
ered; however, there are degrees of complexity that 
would seem to require a close understanding of 
what another participant is referring to. It is this 
isue of mutual-accessibility or 'grounding' that we 
propose can be investigated through the quantifica-
tion of elliptical phenomena. These phenomena 
are, we propose, also related to the way referring 
expressions can contract over repeated use.  (e.g. 
Schober and Clark, 1989; Wilkes-Gibs and Clark, 
192). The approach taken in Clark et al.'s 'col-
laborative theory' is that as mutual understanding 
increases, dialogue contributions become shorter as 
referring terms become part of the common 
ground. Clark and Krych (204) note that various 
elliptical phrases can be used to establish common 
ground, from continuers ('uh-huh', 'yeah') or as-
sessments ('gosh') to establishing shared attention 
through deictic expressions such as 'this', 'that', 
'here' and 'there'. 
  Healey et al. (207) demonstrated the basic con-
cept and viability of quantifying ellipsis phenom-
ena as a quantitative index of mutual-accessibility 
of context. They showed that the frequency of use 
of cros-speaker elliptical expressions in online 
chat varies systematically depending on whether 
communication is ‘local’ i.e. within a single chat 
room or ‘remote’. However, the coding of ellipsis 
in this study did not folow an explicit protocol. It 
relied mainly on the distinctions made by Fernan-
dez et al. (204)  but specific measures of reliabil-
ity and validity were not calculated. 
 
 
96
 
Figure 1. ‘Anaphora’ decision chart 
 
 
In this paper we present an ellipsis coding protocol 
that provides a set of coding categories and we re-
port the inter-rater reliability scores that have been 
obtained with it. In order to simplify coding and 
increase reliability, categories sugested by Fer-
nandez et al. have been colapsed into broader 
ones. It should be pointed out that we are not, in 
general, trying to produce an accurate or definitive 
analysis of ellipsis. The protocol is rather the prod-
uct of contending with the compromise between 
robust coding categories and linguistic elegance. 
The categories presented here are generally or-
dered in terms of occurrence in order to assist the 
coder. A contribution to dialogue may contain 
more than one type of elliptical uterance; contri-
butions are not assigned to one mutually exclusive 
category. Rather, coders are able to use the proto-
col to label any part of a dialogue that is elliptical. 
2. The Elipsis Protocol 
The protocol is designed as a tol for coding one 
aspect of dialogue, developed with the intention 
 
 
 
Figure 2. ‘Answers’ decision chart 
 
that users with no specific knowledge of linguistics 
can use it. As can be seen from Figures 1-4, it con-
sists of four binary branching decision trees that 
are applied to each contribution in an interaction. 
Ful instructions for use of the protocol have also 
been writen and are available from the authors. 
3. Inter-rater reliability 
In order to demonstrate reliability between coders, 
two coders (one computer scientist, one psycholo-
gist) applied the ellipsis protocol to a sample of 
task oriented dialogue. This was taken from the 
HCRC Map Task corpus (Anderson et al, 191); a 
series of dialogues in which one participant at-
tempts to describe a route on a fictional map to 
another. The longest of these dialogues was chosen 
to be coded (transcript Q1NC1) which consisted of 
46 turns and 53 words. Cohen's kappa was cal-
culated using the procedure outlined in Howell 
(194); see Carletta (196) for a discusion of the 
use of kappa in dialogue coding. Kappa in this in-
stance was .81, which shows very high reliability, 
even by conservative standards (Kripendorff, 
97
 
Figure 3. ‘Questions’ decision chart 
 
1980). Table 1 below presents a breakdown of the 
instances of categories that were agreed upon. 
Table 1 shows the total number and approximate 
percentage of agreements. Also given, '1.dis' and 
'2.dis' are the number of observed instances by 
coders one and two respectively identified but dis-
puted for that particular category. The total number 
of elliptical or non-elliptical instances coded, from 
single words or phrases to entire turns was 624; of 
these, 10 (16%) were disagreed upon and 78 in-
stances (12.5%) were agreed to contain no ellipti-
cal phenomena (no ellipsis disagreements = 50). 
Some categories have very low frequencies; how-
ever, previous work sugests that these categories 
are necessary. To some extent this table shows the 
limitations of the kappa statistic; coder agreement 
varies considerably acros these categories. 
 
Figure 4. ‘Statements’ decision chart 
 
 
 Endophor Cataphor Exaphor Vague 
Anaphor 
Total 19 2 8 3 
% 19 .03 1.3 5.3 
1.dis 12 1 1 20 
2.dis 10 3 17 6 
 Polar 
Answer 
Acknowledge Prompted 
NSU Ans. 
Un-
prompted 
NSU Ans. 
Total 13 78 1 7 
% 18.1 12.5 0.2 1.1 
1.dis 7 15 0 1 
2.dis 5 9 1 5 
 Sluice Clarification 
Elipsis 
Check NSU Query 
Total 2 7 20 27 
% .03 1.1 3.2 4.3 
1.dis 0 0 2 5 
2.dis 2 2 0 2 
 Rejection Modification Continua-
tion 
Sentential 
Elipsis 
Total 2 1 13 13 
% .03 .02 2.1 2.1 
1.dis 1 0 3 10 
2.dis 4 0 3 3 
Table 1. Total agrements by category 
 
98
4. Discusion 
Although mutual-accessibility of context is funda-
mental to communication, there has not been a re-
liable method for observing or measuring it. The 
ellipsis protocol presented here thus provides a 
useful step in this direction. It gives a standardised 
coding scheme that can quantify the extent to 
which speakers can directly access the constituents 
of each other’s turns. 
  In previous work there have been several differ-
ent atempts to define taxonomies of elliptical or 
context dependent uterances. For example, non-
sentential uterances (NSUs), e.g. Schlangen and 
Lascarides (203); Fernandez and Ginzburg 
(202); Fernandez, Ginzburg and Lappin (207). 
One isue with these previous approaches is the 
lack of reliability data; a statistic such as Cohen’s 
kappa is needed in order to demonstrate that a tax-
onomy or coding scheme can be reliably applied 
between independent coders. Carletta et al. (197) 
presented a reliable coding scheme for the classifi-
cation of dialogue moves; although there are over-
laps between their categories and ours, the 
questions used in the scheme are intended to estab-
lish solely the function of an uterance and impor-
tantly, not whether the uterance is elliptical. The 
protocol presented here achieves a high level of 
reliability for some of these context dependent 
phenomena without requiring specific prior knowl-
edge of the relevant linguistic theory. 
  Further work wil code a sample from the BNC 
(Burnard, 200) in order to allow comparisons 
with previous taxonomies. The HCRC map task 
corpus has previously been examined in terms of 
various features of dialogue, e.g. Dialogue Games 
Analysis (Kowtko et al, 191) and disfluencies 
(Lickley and Bard, 198). Ongoing work wil de-
velop this through coding the entire HCRC map 
task corpus; providing data on how ellipsis varies 
over different conditions such as medium, familiar-
ity and task role. 
Acknowledgments 
Thanks go to the HCRC group for providing the 
map task data. Thanks also to Jackie Folkes and 
Greg Mils for help and advice. 
 
References 
Anderson, A., Bader. M., Bard, E., Boyle, E., Doherty, 
G. M., Garod, S., Isard, S., Kowtko, J., McAlister, 
J., iler, J., Sotilo, C., Thompson, H. S. and Wein-
ert, R. (191). The HCRC Map Task Corpus. Lan-
guage and Spech, 34, 351-36. 
Burnard, L. (200). Reference Guide for the British Na-
tional Corpus (World Edition). Oxford University 
Computing Services. 
Carleta, J. (196). Asesing agrement on clasifica-
tion tasks: the kapa statistic. Computational Lin-
guistics, 2(2): 249-254. 
Clark, H. H. and Krych, M. A. (204). Speaking while 
monitoring adreses for understanding. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 50, 62-81. 
Eshghi, A. and Healey, P. G. T. (207). Colective states 
of understanding. Procedings of the 8
th
 SIGdial 
workshop on discourse and dialogue. p 2-9. 
Fernandez, R. and Ginzburg, J. (202). Non-sentential 
uterances: a corpus study. Traitement automatique 
des languages: dialogue, 43(2), 13-42. 
Fernandez, R., Ginzburg J and Lapin, S, (204). Clas-
sifying elipsis in dialogue: a machine learning ap-
proach. Procedings of the 20
th
 international 
conference on computational linguistics. p 240-246. 
Fernandez, R. , Ginzburg J and Lapin, S. (207). Clas-
sifying non-sentential uterances in dialogue: a ma-
chine learning aproach. Computational Linguistics 
3(3), 397-427. 
Healey, P. G. T., White, G., Eshghi, A. and Light, A. 
(207). Comunication Spaces. Computer Suported 
Co-operative Work, 207. 
Howel, D. C. (197). Statistical Methods for Psychol-
ogy. Duxbury Pres. 
Kowtko, J. C., Isard, S. D. and Doherty, G. M. (191). 
Conversational games within dialogue. Procedings 
of the espirit workshop on discourse coherence, 
191. 
Kripendorf, K. (1980). Content Analysis: an introduc-
tion to its methodology. Beverly Hils: Sage Publica-
tions. 
Lickley, R. and Bard, E. (198). When can listeners 
detect disfluency in spontaneous spech? Language 
and Spech, 41. 
Schlangen, D. and Lascarides, A. (203). The interpre-
tation of non-sentential uterances in dialogue. Pro-
cedings of the 4
th
 SIGdial workshop on discourse 
and dialogue, 203. 
Schober, M. F. and Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding 
by adreses and overhearers. Cognitive Psychol-
ogy, 21, 21-232. 
Wilkes-Gibs, D. and Clark, H. H. (192). Cordinating 
beliefs in conversation. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 31, 183-194. 
99

