Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Computational Approaches to Linguistic Creativity, pages 63–70,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c 2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Planing Author and Character Goals for Story Gener ation 
 
 Candice Jean Solis, Joan Tifany Siy, Emerald Tabirao,  and Ethel Ong 
Colege of Computer Studies 
De La Sale University 
Manila, Philipines 
candice_solis13@yahoo.com, emeraldtabirao_dlsu@yahoo.com.ph, 
joan.tiffany.siy@gmail.com, ethel.ong@delasalle.ph 
 
 
 
Abstract 
The design and content of the planing library 
of a story generation system dictates the con-
tent quality of the story it produces. This paper 
presents the story planer component of Pi c-
ture Boks, a system that generates stories for 
children aged 4 to 6 years based on a set of 
picture elements selected by the user. The 
planing library separates the design for the 
story paterns from the design of the semantic 
ontology that suplies the story’s domain 
knowledge. An evaluation of the system 
shows that the coherency and complet enes of 
the plot is atributed to the story patern design 
structure while the apropriatenes of the con-
tent is atributed to the semantic ontology. 
1 Introduction

Several researchers have developed story genera-
tors capable of generating stories that closely 
resemble human-made stories. Some of these 
include TALE-SPIN (Mehan, 197) that gener-
ates stories through problem solving, MIN-
STREL (Turner, 192) that uses an episodic 
memory scheme for storing past problem-solving 
cases, and MAKEBELIEVE (Liu and Singh, 
202) that constructs stories with the use of logi-
cal reasoning. 
Calaway and Lester (202) observed that 
most story generators (SG), such as TALE-SPIN 
and MAKEBELIEVE, concentrated on the gen-
eration of plots and the characters, with les em-
phasis on linguistic phenomena, resulting in st o-
ries that have god narative quality but lacking 
in linguistic structures. Their STORYBOK sys-
tem adreses this by aplying ful-scale linguis-
tic aproaches to the narative prose generation 
architecture of AUTHOR (Calaway, 200). 
Loeneker (205) made a similar observation 
regarding SG whose implicit goal is to generate a 
coherent narative in a given genre with les em-
phasis on discourse structure, and skiping 
document structuring and microplaning (Reiter 
and Dale, 200) stages. 
In this paper, we present our story generator, 
Picture Boks, which generates stories for chil-
dren aged four to six. Picture Boks derives the 
story elements from a given input set of picture 
elements (backgrounds, characters, and objects). 
The genre (fables) and story goal (moral lesons) 
are aplied as separate parts of the system’s 
planing library, which contains story planing 
goals to convert abstract story specifications to 
coherent stories suitable for the target age group.  
The rest of this paper is subdivided as fol-
lows. Section 2 presents some background i n-
formation on the specifications of a chi ldren’s 
story as wel as the semantic ontology used by 
the planers of Picture Boks. Section 3 di s-
cuses the design of the plan library and the 
planing proces involved in story generation, 
folowed by the evaluation results on the content 
and gramar of the stories generated by the sys-
tem in Section 4. The paper ends with a sumary 
of future work that can be done to improve the 
generated stories.  
2 Storytelling
and Picture Books 
The motivation behind Picture Boks is two-
fold. First is the realization that stories are com-
binations of various genres to produce a difering 
efect.  The genres can be considered as tem-
plates that dictate the plot of the story.  It is 
therefore posible to create a story by indicating 
the story elements (i.e., characters, events, and 
setings), the genres, and the goal of the story to 
automaticaly produce a narative text. The sec-
ond motivation is that stories serve as rich 
sources of information that help develop a 
child’s knowledge.  However, young children 
recognize images of objects easily compared to 
words (Fields et al, 203), acounting for the 
popularity of picture-based story boks that al-
low readers to relate stories by using not only 
words, but pictures depicting the story. 
63
2.1 Story
Specifications 
Interviews with child educators revealed that 
most of the published storyboks for children 
focus on themes to teach them lesons about 
proper behavior. These themes revolve around 
everyday activities like eating on time and brush-
ing your teth with lesons on being careful, be-
ing honest, and the value of sharing. Themes also 
dictate the objects that can be used in the story, 
for example, in the eating healthy fods theme, 
posible positive objects suporting god behav-
ior are aples and bananas, while cakes and can-
dies are considered negative objects in cases of 
misbehavior (i.e., unhealthy fods). 
Another comon characteristic of children's 
stories is the use of the fable form, wherein the 
story characters are portrayed by animals that 
can capture the imagination and atention of the 
target readers. The animals have simple traits 
that children can relate with, such as loyalty for 
dogs, playfulnes for cats, kindnes for rabits, 
and bravery for tigers. They are also given 
names, such as Elen the elephant, Rizy the rab-
bit, and Leo the lion, to give the impresion that 
the characters are friends that the children are 
geting to know beter through reading the story.  
In the linguistic aspect, stories for four year 
olds have simple sentence structures and contain 
line redundancy. This is lesened as the child 
grows older. The words used in the stories are 
not only simple and easy to understand, but also 
vary depending on the child's age in order to i n-
troduce new words to his vocabulary. Lesons 
and rules are emphasized by positive praises 
while improper behaviors are emphasized by re-
vealing their consequences. 
Another aspect to consider in storyteling is 
the story’s title. Story titles are short and often 
contain the story’s theme as a hint to what the 
story is about. The main character’s name should 
also be included in the title, such as “Leo the 
Lion Learns to Eat on Time”. 
In general, Machado (203) showed that sto-
ries folow a common and clasic story patern 
depicted in Figure 0, which flows from negative 
to positive and has the folowing outline: 
i. The main character wants something.  
i. The main character is informed of the 
rules and/or restrictions. 
ii. The main character disobeys the rule. 
iv. The main character is either caught or 
experiences natural consequences of di s-
obedience (e.g. a toth ache from eating 
to much candy). 
v. The main character learns a leson.  
2.2 Semantic
Ontology 
The knowledge resource dictates the amount of 
information that an SG system can output, thus 
highlighting its importance. Picture Boks uses 
an ontology to have a flexible knowledge re-
source that provides relevant concepts familiar to 
the target age group as wel as aplicable to the 
story being planed. Its design was adapted from 
ConceptNet (Liu and Singh, 204a), a semantic 
resource with structure closely resembling that of 
WordNet (206). 
The nodes used by ConceptNet are of thre 
general clases representing noun phrases, atrib-
utes, and activity phrases. A semantic relation-
ship conects two concepts while a semantic 
category clasifies them. The semantic relation-
ships are binary relation types defined by Open 
Mind Comonsense project (Liu and Singh, 
204b). Table 1 lists some of these rel ationships 
defined in Picture Boks folowing the form <re-
lationship>(<concept1>, <concept2>). 
Quick, satisfying 
conclusion 
Introduction of seting and characters 
Introduction of problem or dilema 
Rising action and plot development 
Insightful answer or solution 
Climactic scene 
Begining 
Ending 
Figure 0. Comon and Clasic Story Patern Form (Machado, 203)  
 
64
Semantic 
Category 
Semantic Relationships 
Things IsA(headache, pain) coresponds losely 
to hypernym in WordNet 
PropertyOf(aple, healthy) 
PartOf(window, pane) – coresponds 
losely to holonym in WordNet 
MadeOf(toy car, clay) 
Events FirstSubeventOf(tel bedtime story, 
slep) 
EventForGoalEvent(go to grocery store, 
buy fod) 
EventForGoalState(clean up, be neat) 
EventRequiresObject(play, toy) 
Actions 
EfectOf(become dirty, itchy) 
EfectOfIsState(make friends, friendship) 
CapableOf(toy car, play) 
Table 1. ConceptNet semantic relationships (Liu and 
Singh, 204b) with sample concepts of Picture Boks 
3 Planning
the Story 
Picture Boks has thre major components – a 
picture editor, a story planer, and a sentence 
planer. The Picture Editor is provided for users 
to specify the background or seting of the story 
(kitchen), and to select and “stick” into the back-
ground the set of characters (litle shep and 
mama shep) and objects (cake, bread). An ex-
ample picture is shown in Figure 2.  
The first child character placed in the picture 
wil be the protagonist of the story, while the first 
adult sticker placed in the picture wil be the par-
ent of the protagonist. If there is no adult charac-
ter, the protagonist's biological parent wil be 
chosen as the adult character neded in the story. 
The first object sticker placed in the picture wil 
asume the %object% variable used in planing 
the story especialy in ontology aceses. The 
rest are discarded. 
Al elements in the picture, namely the back-
ground, the characters and the objects (including 
sequence of placement), and the name and age of 
the user, are stored in an input content represen-
tation (ICR) and pased on to the story planer. 
The Story Planer takes in the abstract ICR 
then performs thre planing steps – i) theme 
planing to select an apropriate theme for the 
story, i) plot planing to instantiate the story 
plots depicting the theme, and ii) presentation 
planing to handle the planing of the story’s 
title, introduction and apropriate ending. A 
Story Organizer aranges these resulting story 
events as it is suposed to be presented to the 
user in an abstract story tre. 
The Sentence Planer then converts the ab-
stract story tre representation to sentence speci-
fications by performing refering expresion 
generation, lexicalization, and phrase specifica-
tion maping. The Surface Realizer uses the sim-
plenlg realiser (Venour and Reiter, 208) to con-
vert the sentence specifications to actual sen-
tences that comprise the story. 
 
 
Figure 2. Sample Picture with Stickers 
3.1 Plan
Library 
The plan library contains the set of instruc-
tions and information on creating the plot of a 
story, and has thre parts: (1) the story elements 
containing information regarding the characters, 
objects and setings of a story; (2) a set of story 
paterns to direct the story goal towards atai n-
ment of the moral leson; and (3) a semantic on-
tology containing concepts aplicable to the tar-
get domain, in this case, fables. 
Picture Boks uses a set of predefined 
characters, objects and backgrounds, as inputs. 
These story elements are used to determine the 
actors, the seting and the theme of a story. 
Information on characters, such as the parents, is 
useful for identifying other characters in the 
story. The background serves as the main seting 
of the story, and combined with the selected 
objects, is used to determine the theme. Given a 
bedrom background, the set of available themes 
include being brave, being neat, being careful, 
being honest, and sleping early. Objects that are 
available for this background incl ude an alarm 
clock, a lamp, a pilow, and toys. 
The story patern is used to direct the goal of 
the story and is composed of the theme, story 
plot, author goal and character goal. Each com-
ponent is designed to subsume the next (i.e., 
theme subsumes story plot, and story plot sub-
sumes author goal) to suport diferent granular-
65
ity of story details and to lesen the redundancy 
as comon story details are subsumed by a 
higher-level component. 
A theme dictates the plot of a story and is 
composed of four story plots (se Figure 3) 
namely, the problem, rising action, solution and 
climax which, acording to Machado (203), are 
the four fundamental stages of the main plot of 
any story. In the theme take_bath, these four 
plots would contain the folowing: 
Problem:     Defy by not doing the rule  
Rising Action: Experience consequence 
Solution:     Do the leson 
Climax:      Learn the benefit 
 
Figure 3. Theme Structure 
 
The theme is executed through the story plot. 
A story plot represents the major events in the 
theme and contains at least two author goals 
(shown in Figure  4) that represent the scenes 
comprising the event. 
 
Figure 4. Story Plot Structure 
 
 
Figure 5. Author Goal Structure 
 
An author goal (Figure 5) is composed of a 
goal of the scene and the coresponding conse-
quence of the goal to ensure consistency in the 
scene. Each goal and consequence component of 
an author goal is in turn filed up by at least one 
character goal.A character goal (Figure 6) rep-
resents the unit of action a character or two char-
acters do in order to depict the goal/consequence 
of the scene. This design of the character  goal is 
based from the action operators of Uijlings 
(206) and can be directly converted to simple 
declarative sentences. 
A character goal has five fields – the action, 
the agens or doer of the action, the patiens or 
receiver of the action, the target, and the instru-
ment. One character goal generates one sentence 
in the story with the agens as the subject, the ac-
tion as the verb, the patiens as the character or 
object that undergoes the action verb, the target 
as the location or object of the action verb, and 
the instrument as the object used to perform the 
verb. This design alows al fields to be empty 
except for action and agens. 
 
 
Figure 6. Character Goal Data Structure 
 
The character goal is generic so that it only 
contains default values for action, agens and pa-
tiens. During instantiation of a character goal  for 
a particular scene, atribute values are pased to 
the character goal at the author goal level. For 
example, given the generic character goal adult 
tels main character (CGL01) has the folowing 
default atributes: 
action: tel 
agens: adult 
patiens: main character 
When a scene requires the adult to inform the 
main character of the leson, the target atribute 
would then be asigned with the leson value to 
denote that the adult is talking to the main char-
acter about the leson. The invocation of the 
character goal in the author goal level would be: 
CGL01(target:leson) 
This customizes the character goal to “adult tels 
the leson to the main character” to fit the scene. 
Parameters for character goal atributes in-
clude not only the story variables (i.e. object, 
leson, background), but invocations to iner 
character goals and ontology aceses as wel. 
An iner character goal is a character goal as-
signed as an atribute of an outer character goal.  
66
It represents a clause in a sentence and is usualy 
asigned as a value of the target atribute in the 
outer character goal, for example: 
CGL03(target:CGL05(target:leson) 
Picture Boks would interpret the iner char-
acter goal “main character is not doing the les-
son (CGL05)” first before apending it to the 
outer character goal “secondary character told 
the adult character (CGL03)”, resulting in the 
folowing sentence specification: 
secondary character tels an adult that the 
main character is not doing the leson 
The instrument atribute in a character goal 
may have the folowing value which would 
triger an ontology search for a concept: 
onto<semantic_category>(%object%) 
The <semantic category> constrains the 
search coverage to concepts that are directly 
conected to the given input concept (%ob-
ject%). For example, ontoSpatial(play) trigers a 
search for al concepts conected to play within 
the spatial semantic category (e.g., “locationOf” 
and “oftenNear” semantic relationships). 
Character goals can also be created dynami-
caly during runtime and are used to increase the 
length and the variation of the generated story.  
Dynamic character goals necesitate the search 
for relationship paths in the ontology. Two input 
concepts, the source and destination concepts, 
and the semantic category that constrains the 
search coverage, are neded when searching for 
relationship paths. 
Consider the folowing atribute value of a 
character goal: 
 ontoEvent(break object, punishment) 
This denotes that a search for a series of seman-
tic relationships within the Event semantic cate-
gory must be performed to relate break object to 
punishment. The resulting path is shown in 
Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Sample Ontology Path Search Result  
 
Each relationship in the resulting path, ex-
cluding isA (hypernym) and conceptualyRelat-
edTo relationships, is maped to a dynamic char-
acter goal. For example, in the first lastSubeven-
tOf relationship in Figure 7, the second concept 
(“get punished”) is asigned to the action atrib-
ute of the dynamic character goal , resulting in 
the abstract output sentence specifications “Main 
character gets punished” and “Main character is 
not alowed to play today”. 
3.2 Planing
Proces 
The Theme Planer selects a theme by matching 
the input objects against the aplicable objects of 
the candidate themes for a specified background. 
When the theme with the highest score has ben 
determined, the Plot Planer instantiates the 
story plots of the chosen theme, begi ning with 
the problem, folowed by the rising action, then 
the solution and finaly the climax. Given the 
theme eat_on_time with the folowing core-
sponding story plots: 
eat_on_time(defy_break_rule, experience_ 
consequence, inform_leson, realize _benefit)
 1
 
the first (problem) story plot, defy_break_rule, 
sugests that the main character wil di sobey an 
adult character’s rule/instruction. Executing this 
plot entails executing the author goals within it.  
defy_break_rule(inform_character_rule,     
ignore _rule) 
Then the first author goal, inform_character 
_rule, sugesting that the adult character informs 
the main character of the rule first, is executed:  
inform_character_rule(adult_talk_character, 
character_not_want) 
Finaly, the character goals in the author goal , 
adult_talk_character and character_not_want, 
are executed. Notice that it is only in the 
character goal level that instantiation of 
characters and objects are made.  
adult_talk_character(“tel”, “Momy Audrey”, 
“Simon”, “eat on time”, nul)
 2
 
character_not_want(“not want”, “Simon”, nul, 
“eat on time”, nul) 
These phrase specifications of character goals 
wil be forwarded later to the surface realizer for 
translation to simple sentences to generate the 
text “Momy Audrey told Simon to eat on time.” 
and “Simon did not want to eat on time.”, 
respectively. 
                                                
1
 Theme format:  
Theme(problem, rising action, solution, cl imax) 
2
 Character Goal format:  
CG(action, agens, patiens, target, instrument) 
67
The planing proces continues by 
backtracking to the first story plot and iterating 
until it exhausts al the theme’s story plots. A 
depth-first tre traversal algorithm is employed 
to recursively traverse the theme tree. An excerpt 
from the theme eat_on_time, starting from the 
story plot defy_break_rule, and its tre traversal, 
is shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Tre Traversal for the Problem “Defy 
Break Rule” of the “Eat_On_Time” Theme 
3.3 Planing
for Linguistic Variation 
Sentences generated by Picture Boks vary in 
length and word complexity acording to the 
user’s age. The variation in length is handled by 
specificity character goals (SCG) that are ap-
pended as suporting details to their respective 
character goals. SCGs are designed so that their 
existence wil give more detail to the preceding 
character goal while ensuring consistency, and 
that their non-existence wil stil make the story 
complete. SCG is not executed when the user is 
four years old, one SCG is executed when the 
user is five years old, and al of SCGs are exe-
cuted when the user is six years old.  
 
Age 
Story Excerpt 
Four 
Elen was scared. She was sad. 
Teacher Sara saw that Elen was crying. 
Teacher Sara told Elen to be brave. 
Five 
Elen was scared. She was lonely. 
Teacher Sara saw that Elen was crying. 
Teacher Sara asked Elen if everything 
was okay. She told her to be brave. 
Six 
Elen was scared. She was upset. 
Teacher Sara saw that she was crying.  
Teacher Sara asked Elen if everything 
was okay. Elen told teacher Sara that she 
was scared. 
Teacher Sara told Elen to be brave.  
Table 2. Excerpts of Stories with Linguistic Variation  
 
Word complexity is adresed by storing dif-
ferent synonymous lexical items in the lexicon. 
The apropriatenes of the lexical items to the 
target age group was verified by child educators. 
Table 2 contains excerpts from Picture Boks’ 
stories for various ages, with boldfaced italics 
showing lexical variation, while underlined sen-
tences are the executed SCGs. Aditional sen-
tences and lexical items can be generated by en-
coding more SCGs into the plan library and the 
ontology, respectively. 
4 Results
and Analysis 
The knowledge base of Picture Boks curently 
contains 9 backgrounds, 1 themes, 40 charac-
ters, 37 objects, 7 author goals, and 61 character 
goals. The lexicon has ben populated with 419 
words apropriate for the target age group, while 
the ontology has 240 concepts and 369 semantic 
relationships. 15 exemplary stories generated by 
the system, consisting of five themes that vary 
per age (4, 5, and 6), were selected. Two child 
educators and a linguist manualy validated the 
apropriatenes of the content and the linguistic 
corectnes of the 15 stories, respectively. 
Each story was rated per criterion from 1 to 4, 
with 4 being the highest. A rate of 4 means that 
the criterion is completely present in the story, 3 
means that the criterion is present but incom-
plete, 2 means the criterion is partialy present,  
and 1 means the criterion is not present. 
4.1 Evaluating
the Story Content 
The evaluation on the story paterns’ role in en-
suring that the story goal is met is shown in Ta-
ble 3, while the evaluation of the semantic ontol-
ogy’s role in suplying domain knowledge to the 
story is shown in Table 4. 
The evaluators gave the stories high ratings in 
terms of plot completenes, validating that the 
stories have al the esential story elements 
(problem, rising action, the solution and the 
climax to the problem) as wel as the introduc-
tion of the time and seting of the story. This was 
atributed to the plan library structure consisting 
of themes, plots, author goals, and character 
goals. Because of this coherency in the plot, the 
understandability criterion received a high 
average score of 3.47. 
Criteria Average 
Story is understandable 3.47 
The setings of the story were de-
scribed 
3.86 
The characters in the story were 
described 
3.67 
Objects are present in the story 4.0 
General Average 3.75 
Table 3. Evaluation on the Story Paterns 
68
Criteria Average 
Sentences are coherent 2.67 
The story has transition 3.47 
The actions of the characters make 
sense 
3.93 
Story is apropriate to target age 3.80 
Objects in the story were described 2.80 
General Average 3.3 
Table 4. Evaluation of the Semantic Ontology 
 
Evaluations on the efectivenes of the 
semantic ontology, on the other hand, produced 
varying scores. The coherency of the sentences 
received a low average score of 2.67, because as 
sen in the excerpt below, a sentence (such as the 
underlined text) depicting that Elen the elephant 
did something to show she is trying to be brave 
was missing in the generated story. 
She wanted to be brave. Elen was brave. She 
wanted to play with others. She bravely intro-
duced herself. Elen made friends. 
Since the ontology did not contain any other 
information of what to do in order to be brave, 
the story content planer did not place any detail 
describing the action of the main character 
depicting her atempt to be brave.  This can be 
remedied by adding more semantic relationships 
(that can be converted to sentences) betwen 
concepts. 
The excerpt from the generated story “Rizy 
the Rabit Learns to be Honest” below also 
afected the coherency criterion when the second 
character, Denise the dog, sudenly apeared in 
the midle of the story when she could have ben 
introduced with the first character, Rizy the 
rabit, at the start of the story. 
The evening was warm. Rizy the rabit was 
in the dining rom. She played near a lamp. 
Rizy broke the lamp. She was scared. Momy 
Francine saw that the lamp was broken. Rizy 
told Momy Francine that Denise broke the 
lamp. 
The criterion regarding story transition 
pertains to the ease of transition of events that 
can be atributed to the path of relati onships 
retrieved from the semantic ontology, which 
more often than not, introduce event transitions 
including character actions.  
The criterion on apropriatenes of the story 
content to the target age received a high average 
score of 3.80 mainly because the semantic 
ontology has ben populated with concepts 
specificaly for the target age group. 
While the presence of objects in the stories 
received a high score of 4.0 (se Table 3) , the 
description of objects received a low score of 
2.80 (se Table 4), because although objects are 
present in the stories, as in “She played near a 
lamp.”, they were not described, i.e., “breakable 
lamp”. This was remedied by adding object 
descriptions in the ontology. However, the 
selection of which description to be used was 
curently not dictated by the story theme, nor 
was the description subsequently used to direct 
the sequences of events in the rest of the story.  
4.2 Evaluating
the Linguistic Aspect 
Table 5 sumarizes the evaluation on the gram-
matical aspect of the generated stories. Since 
mostly simple sentences are generated, they are 
gramaticaly corect and coherent.  
 
CRITERIA AVG 
Sentences are gramaticaly corect  3.20 
Sentences are coherent 3.60 
Pronouns are used corectly 3.45 
Articles are used corectly 3.20 
The story has transition 3.0 
General Average 3.29 
Table 5. Evaluation on Gramar Corectnes  
 
Most of the generated stories contain corect 
usage of pronouns, except for sentences such as 
“Teacher Sara told Elen that Elen should be 
brave”, where the second reference to “Elen” 
should be replaced with the pronoun “she”. The 
evaluators, however, noted the lack of posesive 
pronouns in the text below (the underlined words 
are the identified mising pronouns). 
Porky wanted to play. He played with his toys. 
His toys were scatered. 
There are also ocurences of mising art icles, 
as shown in the excerpt below (the underlined 
words are the mising articles). 
He played near a glas of water. Simon broke 
the glas of water. He was scared. Dady Gary 
saw that the glas of water was broken. 
The generated stories received an average 
score of 3.0 for the transition criterion due to 
mising transitional devices, as shown in the ex-
cerpt below (the underlined words are the miss-
ing transitional devices). 
He apologized to her. Momy Patricia then 
helped Porky to clean up. Son he found the lost 
toys. 
69
5 Conclusion
and Recommendations 
The design of Picture Boks’ plan library, com-
bined with planing operators in the form of 
story plots and character goals, demonstrated that 
gramaticaly corect and coherent stories for 
children aged 4 to 6 can be generated from a 
given set of predefined pictures, provided that 
the apropriate domain knowledge is present. 
The semantic ontology whose design was 
adapted from ConceptNet provided the domain 
knowledge that suplies factual information to 
the story.  The theme structure and its compo-
nents model the way humans perform storytel-
ling and also ensured that the generated st ories 
wil contain the four basic elements of problem, 
rising action, solution, and climax. The separa-
tion of the plan library which dictates the story 
paterns from the semantic ontology gives flexi-
bility to Picture Boks such that it could easily 
be adapted to generate other story domain. 
Curently, Picture Boks generates stories 
with simple declarative sentences. A future im-
provement of the system is to extend the design 
of the character goal to generate stories with di a-
logues. Although comon animals that young 
children can relate with have ben used as the 
main characters of the story, their traits, such as 
loyalty, bravery, and kindnes, have not ben 
considered in determining the flow of the story. 
A similar claim can be made for describing the 
objects used in the story, such that a story pr o-
moting the value of “being thrifty” can use the 
“expensive lamp” as an object, while the value of 
“being careful” can use the “breakable lamp” 
instead. These are aspects of storyteling that can 
be investigated in a future work. 
From a linguistic perspective, the curent i m-
plementation of Picture Boks can generate pro-
nouns and articles, as wel as a transitional de-
vice at the last sentence in the story. However, 
posesive pronouns, the consistent use of art i-
cles, and the generation of apropriate transi-
tional devices in several parts of the story should 
be further explored. The design of the character 
goals can be extended by ading an atribute in-
dicating a conection or the pasage of time be-
twen sentences. Rhetorical Structure Theory 
(Man and Thompson, 198) can also be ap lied 
to author goals and character goals for an efec-
tive discourse structure that would provide a 
smother story flow.  
 
References  
Charles B. Calaway, and James C. Lester. 202. Nar-
rative Prose Generation. Artificial Inteligence, 
139(2): 213-252. 
Charles B. Calaway. 200. Narative Prose Genera-
tion. PhD thesis, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC. 
Robert Dale, and Ehud Reiter. 200. Building Natural 
Language Generation Systems. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Pres. 
Marjorie Fields, Lois Groth, and Katherine Spangler. 
203. Let's Begin Reading Right: A Developmental 
Aproach to Emergent Literacy, 5/E.  Prentice Hal. 
Hugo Liu, and Push Singh. 204a. Comonsense 
Reasoning in and over Natural Language. In Pro-
cedings of the 8th International Conf erence on 
Knowledge-Based Inteligent Information and En-
ginering Systems, 293-306, Welington, New Zea-
land. Springer Berlin. 
Hugo Liu, and Push Singh, 204b. ConceptNet — A 
Practical Comonsense Reasoning Tol -Kit. BT 
Technology Journal, 2(4): 21-26. Springer 
Netherlands. 
Hugo Liu, and Push Singh. 202. Makebelieve: Using 
Comonsense Knowledge to Generate Stories. In 
Procedings of the Eightenth National Conference 
on Artificial Inteligence, 957-958, Edmonton, Al-
berta, Canada. AAI Pres. 
Birte Loeneker. 205. Naratological Knowledge for 
Natural Language Generation. In Procedings of 
the Tenth European Workshop on Natural Lan-
guage Generation, 91-10, Aberden, Scotland. 
Jeane Machado. 203. Storyteling. In Early 
Childhod Experiences in Language Ar ts: 
Emerging Literacy, 304-319. Clifton Park, N.Y. 
Thomson/Delmar Learning. 
Wiliam C. Man, Sandra A. Thompson. 198. 
Rhetorical Structure Theory: Toward a Functional 
Theory of Text Organization. Text, 8(3), 243-281. 
James Mehan. 197. TALE-SPIN, An Interactive 
Program that Writes Stories. Procedings of the 5th 
International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Inteligence, 91-98. Cambridge, M.A. 
Scot R. Turner. 192. Minstrel: A Computer Model 
of Creativity and Storyteling. Los Angeles, Cali-
fornia: University of California. 
Jasper Uijlings. 206. Designing a Virtual 
Environment for Story Generation. MSc Thesis, 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.  
Chris Venour, Ehud Reiter. 208. A Tutorial for 
Simplenlg (version 3.7) 
htp:/ww.csd.abdn.ac.uk/~ereiter/simplenlg/  
WordNet: A Lexical Database for the English Lan-
guage. Princeton University, New Jersey, 206.  
70

