Proceedings of the Workshop on BioNLP, pages 133–141,
Boulder, Colorado, June 2009. c 2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
IdentifyingInteractionSentencesfrom BiologicalLiterature Using
AutomaticallyExtractedPatterns
HaibinLiu
Facultyof ComputerScience
DalhousieUniversity
Halifax, NS, Canada
haibin@cs.dal.ca
ChristianBlouin
Facultyof ComputerScience
DalhousieUniversity
Halifax, NS, Canada
cblouin@cs.dal.ca
VladoKeˇselj
Facultyof ComputerScience
DalhousieUniversity
Halifax, NS, Canada
vlado@cs.dal.ca
Abstract
An important task in information retrieval is to
identifysentencesthatcontainimportantrelation-
ships between key concepts. In this work, we
proposea novel approachto automaticallyextract
sentencepatternsthat containinteractionsinvolv-
ing concepts of molecular biology. A pattern is
definedin this work as a sequenceof specialized
Part-of-Speech(POS) tags that capturethe struc-
ture of key sentences in the scientific literature.
Eachcandidatesentencefor the classificationtask
is encoded as a POS array and then aligned to
a collectionof pre-extracted patterns. The qual-
ity of the alignment is expressed as a pairwise
alignmentscore. The mostinnovative component
of this work is the use of a Genetic Algorithm
(GA) to maximizethe classificationperformance
of the alignment scoring scheme. The system
achieves an F-score of 0.834 in identifyingsen-
tences which describe interactionsbetween bio-
logical entities. This performanceis mostly af-
fected by the quality of the preprocessingsteps
such as term identificationand POS tagging.
1 Introduction
Recent research in informationextraction (IE) in bio-
logical science has focused on extracting information
about interactionsbetweenbiologicalentities from re-
search communications.The type of interactionof in-
terestincludesprotein-protein,protein-DNA, gene reg-
ulations and other interactions between macromole-
cules. This work broadens the definition of the term
“interaction” to include other types of concepts that
are semantically related to cellular components and
processes. This contrasts with the past efforts focus-
ing strictly on molecularinteractions(Blaschke et al.,
1999; Ono et al., 2001). We anticipatethat identifying
the relationshipsbetween concepts of molecular biol-
ogy will facilitate the building of knowledge models,
improve the sensitivity of IE tasks and ultimatelyfacil-
itate the formulationof new hypothesisby experimen-
talists.
The extractionof interactionsis based on the heuris-
tic premise that interacting concepts co-occur within
a given section of text. The challenge is that co-
occurrencecertainlydoes not guaranteethat a passage
contains an interaction(Janget al., 2006; Skusa et al.,
2005). Co-occurrenceis highly dependent on the de-
finition of the section of text within which the target
terms are expected to be found. A thorough compari-
son on the predictionof protein-proteininteractionbe-
tween abstract-level co-occurrenceand sentence-level
co-occurrencewas undertaken (Raychaudhuri,2006).
It is demonstratedthat abstract co-occurrenceis more
sensitive but less specific for interactions. At the cost
of widecoverage,sentenceco-occurrenceincreasesthe
accuracy of interactionprediction. Since the ultimate
goal of IE is to extract knowledge and accuracy is the
most important aspect in evaluating the performance
of such systems, it makes sense to focus the effort
in seeking interaction sentences rather than passages
or abstracts. Not every co-occurrence in sentences
implies a relationship that expresses a fact. In the
2005 GenomicsTrack dataset,50% of all sentenceco-
occurrencesof entities correspondto definite relation-
ships while the rest of the co-occurrencesonly convey
some possible relationshipsor contain no relationship
of interest (Li et al., 2005). Therefore,more sophisti-
catedtext miningstrategies are requiredto classifysen-
tences that describe interactionsbetween co-occurring
concepts.
In the BioCreative II challenge1, teams were asked
to determinewhethera given passageof text contained
informationaboutthe interactionbetweentwo proteins.
This classificationtask worked at the abstractlevel and
the interactingproteinpairs were not requiredto be ex-
tracted. The task for the Learning Languagein Logic
1http://biocreative.sourceforge.net/
133
(LLL’05) challenge 2 was to build systems that ex-
tract interactionsbetween genes or proteins from bio-
logical literature. From individual sentencesannotated
withagent-target relations,patternsor modelshad to be
learned to extract these interactions. The task focused
on extractingonly the interactingpartners.The context
of an interactionmay also be critical to the validity of
the extractedknowledgesince not all statementsfound
in the literatureare always true.
In this work, we propose an approach to automati-
callyextractpatternscontainingrelevant interactionbe-
tween biologicalconcepts. This extractionis based on
the assumptionthat biological interactionsare articu-
lated by a limited number of POS patterns embedded
in sentences where entities/conceptsare co-occurring.
Theextractedpatternsare thenappliedto identifyinter-
action sentences which describe interactions between
biological entities. Our work aims to identify precise
sentencesrather than passages. Because of the nature
of the patterns,we hope that some of the contextual in-
formation present in interaction sentences also play a
role in the classificationtask.
The rest of the paperis organizedas follows: In Sec-
tion2, we review recentresearchadvancesin extracting
biologicalinteractions. Section 3 describesan experi-
mental system designed for our work. Sections 4, 5
and 6 elaborate the approaches and algorithms. Per-
formanceis evaluated in Section 7. Finally, Section 8
summarizesthe paper and introducesfuture work.
2 Relatedwork
Early on, Blaschke (Blaschke et al., 1999) employed
patternsto predictthe presenceof a protein-proteinin-
teraction. A series of patterns was developed manu-
ally to cover the most obvious descriptionsof protein
functions. This process was based on a set of key-
words, includinginteractionverbs, that are commonly
usedto describethis type of interaction.A sentenceex-
tractionsystemBioIE (Divoli and Attwood, 2005) also
uses patternsto extract entire sentencesrelated to pro-
tein families,proteinstructures,functionsand diseases.
The patterns were manually defined and consisted of
singlewords, word pairs, and small phrases.
Although systems relying on hand-coded patterns
have achieved somesuccessin extractingbiologicalin-
teractions, the strict requirement of dedicated expert
work is problematic. Moreover, each type of interac-
tion may requirea definitionof many differentpatterns
includingdifferent arrangementsand different variants
2http://genome.jouy.inra.fr/texte/LLLchallenge/
of the same keyword. Manuallyencoding all patterns
encounteredin a corpus is time-consumingand poten-
tially impracticalin real applications. Thus, automati-
cally learningsuch patternsis an attractive solution.
An approach which combines dynamic program-
ming and sequence alignment algorithmsas normally
used for the comparisonbetweennucleotidesequences
was introducedby Huang et al. (Huang et al., 2004).
This approach is designed to generate patterns useful
for extracting protein-proteininteractions. The main
problemwith this approachis that the scoring scheme
thatis requiredto implementthe alignmentalgorithmis
difficult to defineand containsa potentiallylarge num-
ber of free parameters. We propose a method based
on GeneticAlgorithm(GA) heuristicsto maximizethe
alignment procedure for the purpose of classification.
GAs were also used as a learningstrategy to train finite
state automata for finding biological relation patterns
in texts(Plake et al., 2005). It was reported(Bunescuet
al., 2005; Hakenberg et al., 2005) that automatically
learned patterns identify biological interactions even
more accuratelythan hand-codedpatterns.
3 Overview
of systemdesign
In this work, we have designed an experimentalsys-
tem to facilitate the automaticextraction of biological
interactionpatternsand the identificationof interaction
sentences. It consists of three major modules: biolog-
ical text preprocessing,interaction pattern extraction,
and interactionsentenceidentification.
Biologicaltext preprocessingreformatsthe original
biological texts into candidate sentences. A pattern
learning method is then proposedto automaticallyex-
tract the representative patterns of biological interac-
tions. The obtained patterns are further used to iden-
tify instances that evidently describe biological inter-
actions. Poor performanceduring preprocessingwill
have detrimentaleffects on later stages. In the follow-
ing sections,we will describeeach component.
4 Biologicaltext
preprocessing
4.1 Sentencepreparation
A heuristic method is implementedto detect sentence
boundaries(Mikheev, 2002) based on the assumption
that sentencesare usually demarcatedby some indica-
tive delimitingpunctuationmarks in order to segment
the biological texts into sentence units. Captions and
headingsthat are not grammaticallyvalid sentencesare
thereforedetectedand furthereliminatedfor our work.
134
4.2 Part-of-Speechtagging
POS tagging is then performedto associateeach word
in a sentence with its most likely POS tag. Because
subsequent processing steps typically depend on the
tagger’s output, high performanceat this level is cru-
cial for successin later stages. A statisticaltaggerLin-
gua::EN::Tagger 3 is used to performthis task.
4.3 Biologicalterm
annotation
A learning-based biological term annotation system,
ABTA (Jiampojamarnet al., 2005),is embeddedin our
system. The type of terms includes molecules, such
as genes, proteins and cell lines, and also biological
processes.Examplesof biologicalprocessesas entities
are: “T cell activation” and “IL-2 gene transcription”.
We considerthat a broaderdefinitionof biologicalterm
will include more facts from literature,thus leading to
more generaluse of interactionpatternsfor IE tasks.
ABTA considersthe longest expressionand ignores
embedded entities. Further, instead of distinguishing
terms from their relevant biology concepts, a unified
tag “BIO” is assigned to all the identified terms. We
aim to discover patternsof the generalinteractionsbe-
tweenbiologicalconcepts,not only the interactionsbe-
tweenmolecules,e.g., protein-proteininteraction.
Tags like NN(noun)and VB(verb)are typicallyused
to define entities and the action type of interactions,
and thus they are indispensable. However, tags such
as JJ(adjective) and RB(adverb) could occur at differ-
ent positionsin a sentence.We decidedto remove these
tagsto prevent the combinatorialeffectthatthesewould
inducewithinthe set of extractedpatterns.
4.4 Text
chunking
Next, a rule-based text chunker (Ramshaw and Mar-
cus, 1995) is applied on the tagged sentences to fur-
ther identify phrasal units, such as base noun phrases
NP and verbal units VB. This allows us to focus on the
holisticstructureof eachsentence.Text chunkingis not
applied on the identified biologicalterms. In order to
achieve moregeneralizedinteractionpatterns,a unified
tag “VB” is used to representevery verbal unit instead
of employing different tags for varioustensesof verbs.
As a result of preprocessing,every sentence is rep-
resented by its generalizedform as a sequenceof cor-
respondingtags consistingof POS tags and predefined
tags. Table 1 summarizesthe main tags in the system.
A biologicalinteractiontendsto involve at leastthree
objects: a pair of co-occurringbiologicalentities con-
3http://search.cpan.org/˜acoburn
Tag name Tag description Tag type
BIO Biologicalentity Predefined
NP Base noun phrase Predefined
VB Verbal unit Predefined
IN Preposition POS
CC Coordinatingconjunction POS
TO to POS
PPC Punctuationcomma POS
PRP Possessive 2nd determiner POS
DET Determiner POS
POS Possessive POS
Table 1: Main tags used in the system
nected by a verb which specifiesthe action type of the
interaction.Thus, a constraintis appliedthat only sen-
tences satisfying form “BioEntityA – Verb – BioEn-
tity B” will be preserved as candidatesentencesto be
further processedin the system. It is possible that the
presenceof two entitiesin differentsentencestructures
impliesa relationship.However, this work assumesthe
underlyingco-occurrenceof two conceptsand a verb in
the interestof improving the classificationaccuracy.
The obtainedcandidatesentencesare split into train-
ing and testing sets. The training set is used to ex-
tract the representative patterns of biological interac-
tions. The testing set is prepared for identifyingsen-
tencesthat evidentlydescribebiologicalinteractions.
5 Interactionpattern
extraction
5.1 PATRICIAtrees
The method we propose to extract interactionpatterns
fromcandidatesentencesis basedon the use of PATRI-
CIA trees (Morrison, 1968). A PATRICIA tree uses
path compressionby groupingcommonsequencesinto
nodes. This structureprovides an efficient way of stor-
ing values while maintainingthe lookuptime for a key
of O(N). It has been appliedto many large information
retrieval problems(Chien,1997; Chen et al., 1998).
In our work, a PATRICIA tree is used for the first
time to facilitatethe automaticextractionof interaction
patterns. All trainingsentencesare insertedand stored
in a generic PATRICIA tree from which the common
patterns of POS tags can be efficiently stored and the
tree structureused to computerelevant usage statistics.
5.2 Potentialpattern
extraction
Patterns of straightforward biological interactions are
frequentlyencounteredin a range of actual sentences.
Conversely, vague relationships or complex interac-
tions patterns are seldom repeated. Therefore, the
135
premiseof this work is that there is a set of frequently
occurring interactionpatterns that matches a majority
of stated facts about molecularbiology. In this work, a
biological interactionpatternis definedas follows:
Definition5.1. A biologicalinteractionpatternbip
is a sequenceof tags definedin Table 1 that capturesan
aggregate view of the descriptionof certaintypesof bi-
ologicalinteractionsbasedon the consistentlyrepeated
occurrencesof this sequenceof tags in different inter-
action sentences. BIP = {bip1,bip2,···,bipk} repre-
sents the set of biologicalinteractionpatterns.
We first extract potential interaction patterns by
populatinga PATRICIA tree using training sentences.
Every node in the tree contains one or more system
tags, whichis the precedingtag sequenceof its descen-
dant nodes in each sentence. Every sentence is com-
posed of a path of system tags from the root to a leaf.
Hence, we propose that the sequence of system tags
that can be formedfromtraversingthe nodesof the tree
is a potentialpattern of biologicalinteractions. At the
same time, the occurrencefrequency of each patternis
also retrieved from the traversal of tree nodes.
A predefined frequency threshold fmin is used as
a constraint to filter out patterns that occur less than
fmin times. It has been demonstratedthat if an interac-
tion is well recognized,it will be consistentlyrepeated
(Blaschke et al., 1999; Ono et al., 2001). The general-
izationandthe usabilityof patternscanbe controlledby
tuning fmin. Further, some filtering rules are adapted
to controlthe form of a patternand enhancethe quality
of the discoveredpatterns,suchas if a patternendswith
a tag IN, VB, CC or TO, the pattern will be rejected.
Flexibility in setting this threshold can be applied to
meet special demands. Algorithm1 shows our pattern
learningmethodwhich has a time complexity of O(n)
in the size of candidatesentences,n.
Algorithm1 Patricia-Tree-basedExtractionof Biolog-
ical InteractionPatterns
Input: CandidateSentencesCS ∈Biologicaltext; a prede-
fined thresholdfmin; a set of filteringrulesFR
Output: BIP : Set of biologicalinteractionpatterns
BIP ←∅; PT ←∅ //PT : PatriciaTrie
for all sentencess∈CS do
PT ←Insert(s) //PopulatingPatriciaTree
for all nodesni ∈PT do
bipi ←Pattern(ni) //Concatenatingtags in nodes
from root to ni, whichis a potentialpattern
if Count(bipi) ≥ fmin and bipi does not meet FR
then
//Count(bipi) returnsNo. of occurrencesof bipi;
BIP ←bipi
5.3 Interactionverb
mining
Although the obtained patterns are derived from the
candidatesentencespossessingthe form “BioEntityA
– Verb – BioEntityB”, some of them may not contain
facts about biological interactions. This is possible if
the action verbs do not describean interaction.Quite a
few verbs, such as “report”,“believe”, and “discover”,
only serve a narrative discourse purpose. Therefore,
miningthe correctinteractionverbs becomesan impor-
tant step in the automaticdiscovery of patterns. We de-
cided to perform the method applied in (Huang et al.,
2004) to mine a list of interactionverbs. This will be
used to further improve the relevance of achieved pat-
terns by filtering out patterns formed by the sentences
in whichthe actionverbs are not on the list.
6 Interactionsentenceidentification
Once the biological interaction patterns are obtained,
we perform interactionsentence identificationon test-
ing sentences. For our work, they are partitionedinto
two sets: interactionsentenceswhichexplicitlydiscuss
interactionsbetween entities, and non-interactionsen-
tences which do not describe interactions, or merely
imply some vague relationshipsbetween entities. The
task of interactionsentenceidentificationis treatedas a
classificationproblemto differentiatebetweeninterac-
tion sentencesand non-interactionsentences.
6.1 Pattern
matchingscoring
We first performpatternmatchingby iteratively apply-
ing the interaction patterns to each testing sentence.
Thisis doneusingsequencealignmentwhichcalculates
the degree of the similarity of a sentence to an inter-
action pattern. Since patterns capture various ways of
expressinginteractionsamong sentences,a high simi-
larity between an interactionsentence and a pattern is
expected. Therefore,we conjecturethat the alignment
scores can be used to discriminatesome type of inter-
actionsentencesfrom other types of sentences.
The scoring scheme involved in the pattern match-
ing consistsof penaltiesfor introducinggaps, matchre-
wards and mismatchpenaltiesfor different system tag
pairs. Table 2 presentsan examplescoringschemefor
main tags. Penalties and rewards are denoted respec-
tively by negative and positive values.
As a variationof globalalignment,an end-spacefree
alignment algorithm is implemented to facilitate the
alignmentbetweenpatternsand testing sentences. The
shortest pattern is always preferred for a sentence in
case that same alignmentscore is achieved by multiple
136
Tag Gap Match Mismatch
BIO -10 +8 -3
NP -8 +6 -3
VB -7 +7 -3
IN -6 +5 -1
CC -6 +5 -1
TO -1 +5 -1
PPC -1 +3 -1
PRP -1 +3 -1
DET -1 +3 -1
POS -1 +3 -1
Table 2: An alignmentscoringschemefor systemtags
patterns. As a result, each sentence is assigned to its
most appropriatepatternalong with a maximumalign-
ment score. Therefore,an interactionsentencewill be
highlighted with a high alignment score by its most
similarinteractionpattern,whilea non-interactionsen-
tence will be characterizedby a low alignment score
indicating rejections by all patterns. Essentially, this
procedurecan be seen as a variationof the well-known
k NearestNeighborsclassificationmethod,withk = 1.
6.2 Performanceevaluation
We then evaluate whether the alignmentscores can be
used to classify the testing sentences. We have pro-
posed two independentevaluationmeasures:statistical
analysis(SA) and classificationaccuracy (AC).
SA measures whether the scoring difference be-
tween the mean of interactionsentencesand the mean
of non-interactionsentencesis statisticallysignificant.
If the differenceis significant,there will be a tendency
that interactionsentencesoutscorenon-interactionsen-
tences in alignment. Hence, it would be reliable to
use alignmentscores to classify testing sentences. Al-
though non-interactionsentencescould come from the
same documents as interaction sentences and discuss
concepts that are associated with the target interac-
tions, we assume that interaction sentences and non-
interactionsentencesare two independentsamples.
The statistical two-sample z test (Freund and Per-
les, 2006) is performed with the null hypothesis that
there is no scoring difference between the means of
interactionand non-interactionsentences. A compar-
atively large z will lead to the rejection of the null
hypothesis. Naturally, the increase of z value will in-
crease the difference betweenthe means and therefore
conceptuallykeep pushing the overall scoring distrib-
utions of two samples further away from each other.
Consequently, interaction sentences can be separated
from non-interactionsentencesaccordingto alignment
scores. In reality, the distinction between interaction
and non-interactionsentences is not absolute. Thus,
the scoring distributions of two samples can only be
distancedby a certain maximumvalue of z depending
on the scoringschemeappliedin patternmatching.
Conversely, AC measuresthe proportionof correctly
classified testing sentences, including both interaction
and non-interactionsentences,to the total testing sen-
tences. An appropriatethresholdT is determinedfor
obtained alignmentscores to differentiatebetween in-
teraction and non-interactionsentences, and to facili-
tate the calculationof classificationaccuracy.
It is not possibleto evaluatethe performancewithout
correctlypre-labeledtesting sentences. We decided to
manually classify the testing sentences in advance by
assigning each sentence an appropriatelabel of inter-
action or non-interaction.This work was done by two
independentexperts, both with Ph.D. degrees in mole-
cular biologyor a relateddiscipline.
6.3 Scoringschemeoptimization
The scoring scheme applied in pattern matchinghas a
crucial impact on the performanceof interaction sen-
tence identification.An interestingproblemis whether
there exists an optimal scoring scheme covering the
costs of gap, match and mismatch for different sys-
tem tags in the pattern matching alignment, which is
destined to achieve the best performanceon classify-
ing testing sentences. To the best of our knowledge,
no efforts have been made to investigate this problem.
Instead, an empirical or arbitrary scoring scheme was
adopted in previous research for the pairwise align-
ments(Huanget al., 2004;Hakenberg et al., 2005). We
have proved that the problemis NP-hardby reducinga
well-known NP-hardproblem3-SAT to this problem.
The proof is not presentedin this work.
A genetic algorithm (GA) is used as a heuristic
method to optimize parametersof the scoring scheme
for sentence classification. The costs of penalties and
rewards for different system tags are encoded by inte-
ger values within two predefinedranges: [-50, 0) and
(0, 50], and assembledas a potential solution of scor-
ing scheme, which consists of 30 parameterscovering
the costs for tags in the alignmentas listed in Table 2.
The two evaluation measuresSA and AC are used as
the fitness function for GA respectively with the goal
of maximizingz value or classificationaccuracy.
GA is set up to evolve for 100 generations,each of
which consists of a population of 100 potential solu-
tions of scoring scheme. GA starts with a randomly
137
generated population of 100 potential solutions and
proceedsuntil 100 generationsare reached. The num-
ber of generationsand the populationsize are decided
with considerationof the runtimecost of evaluatingthe
fitnessfunction,which requiresrunningthe scoringal-
gorithmwith each sentence. A large numberof gener-
ations or a large populationsize would incur an expen-
sive runtimecost of evaluation.
In addition,we further divide the labeledset of can-
didate sentences into two subsets: The first dataset is
used to optimize parameters of the scoring scheme,
while the second dataset, testing set, is used to test the
achieved schemeon the task of sentenceclassification.
7 Resultsand
evaluation
7.1 Dataset
Our experiments have been conducted on Genia cor-
pus (v3.02) 4, the largest, publicly available corpus in
molecularbiologydomain. It consistsof 2,000 biolog-
ical research paper abstracts and is intended to cover
biologicalreactionsconcerningtranscriptionfactors in
human blood cells. The informationof sentence seg-
mentation,word tokenization,POStaggingand biolog-
ical term annotationis also encodedin the corpus.
7.2 Biologicaltext
preprocessingresults
Evaluatedusing the inherentlyequippedannotationin-
formation, our system achieves nearly 99% accuracy
on segmentingsentences. Further, it obtainsan overall
POS tagging accuracy of 91.0% on 364,208 individ-
ual words. We noticedthat the tagginginformationen-
codedin Geniacorpusis not always consistentthrough-
out the whole corpus, thus introducingdetrimentalef-
fects on the tagging performance. Also, considering
that the tagger is parameterizedaccording to the gen-
eral Englishdomain,porting this tagger to the biology
domainis accompaniedby some loss in performance.
The system reaches an F-score of 0.705 on annotat-
ing all biologicalterms includingboth multi-word and
singleword terms. After performingtext chunking,the
system producesa set of candidatesentences. We fur-
ther perform text chunking on Genia corpus based on
its encodedannotationsand use the resultingset of sen-
tencesfor the subsequentexperimentsto providea gold
standardto whichresultsproducedbasedon our system
annotationscan be compared. Table 3 presents some
statisticsof the preprocesseddataset. For each type of
annotations,we randomizedthe candidatesentenceset
4http://www-tsujii.is.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/GENIA/
and chose 12,525 candidate sentences as the training
set to extract biological interactionpatterns. The rest
of candidatesentencesare preparedas the testingset.
Attributes Genia Our system
Total preprocessedsentences 18,545 18,355
Candidatesentences 16,272 17,525
Trainingset sentences 12,525 12,525
Testingset sentences 6,020 5,000
Table 3: Statisticsof experimentaldataset
7.3 Interactionpattern
extractionresults
fmin = 5 is used to filter out the potential patterns
that appear less than 5 times in the training set. Eval-
uated by domain experts, lists of 300 interactionverbs
and700non-interactionverbsare obtainedfrom12,525
trainingsentenceswith Genia annotations.Inflectional
variantsof the verbs are also added into the lists.
Refined by the filtering rules and the interaction
verbs, a final set of representative patternsof biological
interactionsare obtained from Algorithm 1. We per-
formedour proposedpatternlearningmethodon train-
ing sentences of both the GENIA and our own anno-
tations. There are respectively 241 and 329 potential
patterns. Of these, 209 and 302 were extracted. Inter-
estingly, only97 extractedpatternsare commonto both
annotationschemes.
Table4 lists the 10 mostfrequentinteractionpatterns
based on Genia annotations. For instance, a training
sentenceconformingto the second pattern is “The ex-
pression of the QR gene is regulated by the transcrip-
tion factor AP-1.” (MEDLINE:96146856).
Pattern count Pattern
264 BIO VB BIO IN BIO
261 NP IN BIO VB IN BIO
182 NP IN BIO VB BIO
162 BIO IN BIO VB IN BIO
160 BIO VB IN BIO IN BIO
143 NP IN BIO VB IN NP IN BIO
142 NP VB IN BIO VB BIO
138 PRP VB IN BIO VB BIO
126 BIO VB NP IN BIO IN BIO
121 NP IN BIO VB NP IN BIO
Table 4: ExtractedBiologicalInteractionPatterns
7.4 Interactionsentenceidentificationresults
Since the total testingsentenceset is large, we decided
to randomlyextract 400 sentencesfrom it as the sam-
ple set for our task. The 400 sentences were manu-
138
Figure1: AC comparisonbetweentwo measures
ally pre-labeledinto two classes: interactionand non-
interaction. Further, a subset of 300 testing sentences
was used by GA to optimize parameters of the scor-
ing scheme, while the remaining 100 sentences were
preparedto test the achieved schemeon sentenceclas-
sification.The distributionof classlabelsof the sample
sentencesis shown in Table 5.
Class label 300 sentences 100 sentences
No. % No. %
Interaction 158 52.67 53 53
Non-interaction 142 47.33 47 47
Table 5: Class distribution of samplesentences
7.4.1 Comparisonbetweentwo
measures
We applied the evaluation measures, SA and AC,
respectively to the subset of 300 testing sentences as
the fitness function for GA, and recorded the scoring
schemeof every generationresultedfromGA. Figure1
presents the distribution of achieved classificationac-
curacy in terms of each scoring scheme optimized by
GA. This comparisonis done with respectto the gener-
ation and evaluated on 300 testing sentencesusing the
annotationsfrom the Genia corpus.
The achieved classification accuracy for AC gen-
erally outperformsthe classificationaccuracy derived
by SA. It reaches its highest classificationaccuracy
80.33% from the 91th generation. Therefore, AC is
consideredmoreefficientwith the systemand becomes
our final choiceof fitnessfunctionfor GA.
7.4.2 Resultsof
sentenceidentification
GA results in an optimizedperformanceon the 300
sentences. It also results in an optimized scoring
scheme along with its associatedscoring thresholdT,
which are then applied together to the other 100 test-
ing sentences.Table 6 and 7 presentthe systemperfor-
manceon the two sets respectively to both annotations.
Experimental Genia Our system
Results Interaction Non Interaction Non
Precision 0.757 0.887 0.704 0.702
Recall 0.928 0.665 0.761 0.640
F-score 0.834 0.750 0.731 0.670
OverallAC(%) 80.33 70.33
Table 6: Performanceon 300 testingsentences
Experimental Genia Our system
Results Interaction Non Interaction Non
Precision 0.739 0.762 0.676 0.697
Recall 0.792 0.723 0.755 0.638
F-score 0.765 0.742 0.713 0.666
OverallAC(%) 75.96 70.00
Table 7: Performanceon 100 testingsentences
Table 6 shows that when using the Genia annota-
tions the system achieves an 0.834 F-scorein identify-
ing interactionsentencesand an overallAC of 80.33%,
which is much higher than the proportionof either in-
teraction or non-interactionsentences in the 300 sen-
tence subset. This indicates that the system performs
well on both classes. In 100 generationsGA is not able
to evolve a scoring scheme that leads to an AC above
80.33%. Moreover, our system annotations achieve
a lower performancethan Genia annotations. We at-
tribute the differenceto the accuracy loss of our system
annotationsin the preprocessingstepsas inaccuratean-
notationswill leadto inappropriatepatterns,thusharm-
ing the performanceof sentenceidentification.For Ge-
nia annotations,the performanceon the 100testingsen-
tencessuggestsan overfittingproblem.
Thereare a numberof preprocessingstepsthat affect
the final classificationperformance.However, even as-
sumingan ideal preprocessingof the unstructuredtext,
our method relies on the assumption that all interac-
tion sentencesare articulatedby a set of POS patterns
that are distinct to all other types of sentences. The
manualannotationof the training/testingset was a dif-
ficult task, so it is reasonableto assume that this will
also be difficult for the classifier. The use of passive
voice and the common use of comma splicing within
patterns makes sentence-level classification an espe-
cially difficult task. Anothersourceof interactionsthat
our system cannot identify are implied and assume a
deeper semantic understandingof the concepts them-
139
selves. Other sentencesare long enoughthat the inter-
action itself is merely a secondarypurpose to another
idea. All of these factors pose interesting challenges
for future developmentof this work.
Moreover, we also experimentedwith 10 empirical
scoringschemesderived from previousexperimentson
the 300 sentencesrespectively, includingthe schemein
the Table2. Severalfixed thresholdswereattemptedfor
obtained alignmentscores to differentiatebetween in-
teractionand non-interactionsentences. Without using
GA to optimizeparametersof the scoring scheme, the
best performanceof 10 empiricalschemesis an overall
AC of 65.67%, which is outperformedat the 3rd gen-
erationof the GA optimizationwith Geniaannotations.
7.5 Systemperformancecomparison
Within the framework of our system, we further con-
ducted experiments on the same dataset for sentence
identification using interaction patterns generated by
anotherpattern generatingalgorithm(PGA) (Huanget
al., 2004) in order to comparewith the performanceof
patternsobtainedby our patternlearningmethod.
In our implementation,PGA iterates over all pairs
of candidatesentencesin the trainingset and calculates
the best alignment for each pair in terms of the cost
schemeof gap penaltiesproposed(Huanget al., 2004).
Each consensussequence from the optimal alignment
of each pair forms a pattern. The filter rules proposed
are also applied. PGA has a time complexity of O(n2)
in the size of candidatesentences,n. Hence, our pro-
posed pattern learning method is much more efficient
when dealingwith large collectionsof biologicaltexts.
PGA produces a large number of patterns, even with
fmin = 5 and other filteringcriteria. There are 37,319
commonpatternsbetweentwo types of annotations.
Attributes Genia Our system
Potentialpatterns(fmin = 5) 476,600 387,302
Extractedpatterns(fmin = 5) 176,082 88,800
Table 8: Pattern extractionresultsof PGA
In order to make a direct comparison,we decidedto
experiment with the same number of interaction pat-
terns. For Genia annotations,we chose the most fre-
quent 209 patternsgeneratedby PGA to comparewith
the 209 patternsby our method. For our systemannota-
tions,two sets of 302 patternsare employed. Further, it
is foundthat thereare 96 commonpatternsbetweenthe
two sets of 209 patternsfor Geniaannotations,and 153
commonpatternsbetweenthe two sets of 302 patterns
for our system annotations.Table 9 and 10 presentthe
results of sentence identificationof PGA. The results
show that patterns generated by PGA do not perform
as well as patternsobtainedby our method.
Experimental Genia Our system
Results Interaction Non Interaction Non
Precision 0.721 0.869 0.663 0.699
Recall 0.918 0.606 0.785 0.556
F-score 0.808 0.714 0.719 0.619
OverallAC(%) 77.00 67.67
Table 9: Performanceof PGA on 300 testingsentences
Experimental Genia Our system
Results Interaction Non Interaction Non
Precision 0.664 0.796 0.698 0.635
Recall 0.849 0.574 0.566 0.766
F-score 0.745 0.667 0.625 0.694
OverallAC(%) 71.98 66.00
Table 10: Performanceof PGA on 100 testingsentences
8 Conclusionand
future work
In this paper, a novel approach is presented to auto-
maticallyextract the representative patternsof biologi-
cal interactions,whichare used to detectsentencesthat
describebiologicalinteractions. We conductedthe ex-
periments on our designed system based on the Ge-
nia corpus. By means of a genetic algorithm,the sys-
tem achieves an 0.834F-scoreusing Geniaannotations
and an 0.731 F-score using our system annotationsin
identifyinginteractionsentencesby evaluating300sen-
tences. By applying the optimized scoring scheme to
anotherset of 100 sentences,the systemachieves com-
parable results for both types of annotations. Further-
more,by comparingwithanotherpatterngeneratingal-
gorithm,we infer that our proposedmethodis more ef-
ficientin producingpatternsto identifyinteractionsen-
tences.
In our future work, we would like to employ the ob-
tained interaction patterns to guide the extraction of
specific interactions. The matching between patterns
and sentenceswill be performedand the matchedparts
of each sentencewill be extractedas candidateinterac-
tions. Further reasoning processes can be performed
by means of available biological ontologies, such as
UMLS Semantic Network (Mccray and Bodenreider,
2002) and Gene Ontology (Consortium,2001), to in-
fer new relations from the initial interactions. Such
processescan be employed to derive additionalbiolog-
ical knowledgefrom existingknowledge,or test for bi-
ologicalconsistency of the newly entereddata.
140
References
ChristianBlaschke, MiguelA. Andrade,ChristosOuzounis,
and AlfonsoValencia. 1999. Automaticextractionof bi-
ological informationfrom scientifictext: Protein-protein
interactions. In Proceedingsof the Seventh International
Conference on Intelligent Systemsfor MolecularBiology,
pages 60–67.AAAIPress.
Razvan Bunescu,Ruifang Ge, RohitJ Kate,Edward M Mar-
cotte, RaymondJ Mooney, Arun K Ramani, and Yuk W
Wong. 2005. Comparative experimentson learninginfor-
mationextractorsfor proteinsand their interactions.Arti-
ficial Intelligence in Medicine, 33(2):139–155.
Keh-Jiann Chen, Wen Tsuei, and Lee-Feng Chien. 1998.
Pat-treeswith the deletionfunctionas the learningdevice
for linguistic patterns. In Proceedingsof the 17th inter-
national conference on Computationallinguistics, pages
244–250,Morristown, NJ, USA. Associationfor Compu-
tationalLinguistics.
Lee-Feng Chien. 1997. Pat-tree-based keyword extrac-
tion for chinese information retrieval. SIGIR Forum,
31(SI):50–58.
Gene OntologyConsortium.2001. Creatingthe gene ontol-
ogy resource: design and implementation. Genome Re-
search, 11(8):1425–1433.
Anna Divoli and Teresa K. Attwood. 2005. Bioie: extract-
ing informative sentencesfrom the biomedicalliterature.
Bioinformatics, 21(9):2138–2139.
John E. Freund and Benjamin M. Perles. 2006. Modern
ElementaryStatistics. PrenticeHall.
Jorg Hakenberg, Conrad Plake, Ulf Leser, Harald Kirsch,
and Dietrich Rebholz-Schuhmann. 2005. Lll’05 chal-
lenge: Genic interactionextraction with alignmentsand
finite state automata. In Proceedings of Learning Lan-
guage in Logic Workshop(LLL’05)at ICML, page38C45,
Bonn,Germany.
Minlie Huang, Xiaoyan Zhu, Yu Hao, Donald G. Payan,
Kunbin Qu, and Ming Li. 2004. Discovering patternsto
extract protein-proteininteractionsfrom full texts. Bioin-
formatics, 20:3604–3612.
Hyunchul Jang, Jaesoo Lim, Joon-Ho Lim, Soo-Jun Park,
Kyu-ChulLee,andSeon-HeePark. 2006. Findingthe ev-
idence for protein-proteininteractionsfrom pubmed ab-
stracts. Bioinformatics, 22(14):e220–e226.
Sittichai Jiampojamarn, Nick Cercone, and Vlado Keˇselj.
2005. Biological Named Entity Recognition using N-
grams and ClassificationMethods. In Proceedingsof the
Conference Pacific Association for ComputationalLin-
guistics,PACLING’05, Tokyo, Japan.
Jiao Li, Xian Zhang, Yu Hao, Minlie Huang, and Xiaoyan
Zhu. 2005. Learning domain-specificknowledge from
context–thuir at trec2005 genomics track. In Proceed-
ings of 14th Text Retrireval Conference (TREC2005),
Gaithersburg, USA.
Alexa T. Mccrayand Olivier Bodenreider. 2002. A concep-
tual framework for the biomedicaldomain. In Semantics
of Relationships,Kluwer, pages 181–198.Kluwer Acad-
emic Publishers.
Andrei Mikheev. 2002. Periods, capitalized words, etc.
Comput.Linguist., 28(3):289–318.
DonaldR. Morrison. 1968. Patricia — PracticalAlgorithm
To Retrieve InformationCoded in Alphanumeric. Jour-
nal of the ACM, 15(4):514–534.
Toshihide Ono, Haretsugu Hishigaki, Akira Tanigami, and
Toshihisa Takagi. 2001. Automatedextraction of infor-
mationon protein-proteininteractionsfromthe biological
literature. Bioinformatics, 17(2):155–161.
ConradPlake, Jorg Hakenberg, and Ulf Leser. 2005. Learn-
ing patterns for informationextractionfrom free text. In
Proceedingsof AKKD2005, Karlsruhe,Germany.
Lance Ramshaw and Mitch Marcus. 1995. Text chunking
using transformation-basedlearning. In Proceedings of
the Third Workshopon Very Large Corpora, pages82–94,
Somerset,New Jersey.
Soumya Raychaudhuri. 2006. ComputationalText Analy-
sis: For FunctionalGenomics and Bioinformatics. Ox-
ford University Press.
Andre Skusa, Alexander Ruegg, and Jacob Kohler. 2005.
Extractionof biologicalinteractionnetworks from scien-
tific literature. Brief Bioinform, 6(3):263–276.
141

