Proceedings of SIGDIAL 2009: the 10th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group in Discourse and Dialogue, pages 79–86,
Queen Mary University of London, September 2009. c©2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
A: An Experimental Investigation into...
B: ...Split Utterances
Christine Howes, Patrick G.T. Healey and Gregory J. Mills
QueenMaryUniversityofLondon
Interaction,MediaandCommunicationResearchGroup,London,E14NS
{chrizba, ph, gj}@dcs.qmul.ac.uk
Abstract
Adistinguishingfeatureofdialogueisthat
morethatonepersoncancontributetothe
production of an utterance. However, un-
tilrecentlythese‘split’utteranceshavere-
ceived relatively little attention in mod-
els of dialogue processing or of dialogue
structure. Here we report an experiment
that tests the effects of artificially intro-
duced speaker switches on groups of peo-
ple engaged in a task-oriented dialogue.
The results show that splits have reliable
effects on response time and on the num-
ber of edits involved in formulating sub-
sequent turns. In particular we show that
if the second half of an utterance is ‘mis-
attributed’ people take longer to respond
to it. We also show that responses to ut-
terances that are split across speakers in-
volve fewer deletes. We argue that these
effects provide evidence that: a) speaker
switches affect processing where they in-
terfere with expectations about who will
speaknextandb)thatthepragmaticeffect
ofasplitistosuggesttootherparticipants
theformationofacoalitionorsub-‘party’.
1 Introduction
Split utterances, defined simply as utterances
which are split between speakers1, are known
to occur in dialogue, as evidenced by Conversa-
1What we call split utterances have been variously re-
ferred to as collaborative turn sequences (Lerner, 1996;
Lerner, 2004), collaborative completions (Clark, 1996) co-
constructions (Helasvuo, 2004), co-participant completions
(Hayashi,1999;LernerandTakagi,1999)collaborative pro-
ductions(Szczepek,2000)andanticipatorycompletions(Fox
andothers,2007)amongstothers.
tional Analysis (CA) studies, based on the anal-
ysis of naturally occuring dialogues. In addi-
tion to numerous analyses of split utterances in
generic English dialogues, there are cross lin-
guistic studies, and observations of conversations
with aphasics. In Finnish, split utterances within
a single clause conform to the strict syntactic
constraints of the language (which has a rich
inflectional morphology), despite the change in
speaker (Helasvuo, 2004). Similarly, in Japanese,
averb-finallanguage,speakersalsoengagein“co-
participant completions” (Hayashi, 1999; Lerner
and Takagi, 1999). There is also evidence of
split utterances in conversations with aphasics
(Oelschlaeger and Damico, 1998), demonstrat-
ing that the phenomenon is pervasive in dia-
logue. However, with the possible exception of
Szczepek (2000) who analysed some 200 splits
from 40 hours of recorded English conversation,
thesestudiestendtobeunconcernedwithfrequen-
ciesofoccurrence;thatsplitutterancesoccuratall
rendersthemworthyofstudy.
Splitutterancesareaclearandcanonicalexam-
ple of coordination in dialogue. In order for one
persontocontinueanutterancewhichhasbeenbe-
gun by another person requires the hearer to have
coordinatedwiththeinitialspeakeruptothepoint
atwhichtheytakeovertheroleofproducer2.
Analysis of split utterances, when they can or
cannotoccurandwhateffectstheyhaveontheco-
ordination of agents in dialogue, is therefore an
area of interest not only for conversational an-
alysts wishing to characterise sytematic interac-
tions in dialogue, but also linguists trying to for-
mulate grammars of dialogue, and psychologists
interested in alignment mechanisms in dialogue.
2Notethatthissaysnothingaboutwhethersuchacontinu-
ationisthesameastheinitialspeakersintendedcontinuation.
79
In this regard, studies of split utterances, in both
spontaneous dialogues and experimentally, as be-
low, provide a complementary way of studying
structural alignment to the traditional experimen-
talsetupexemplifiedbyBraniganandcolleagues
(Branigan et al., 2000; Branigan et al., 2003;
Branigan et al., 2006). Indeed, Poesio and Rieser
(In preparation) claim that “[c]ollaborative com-
pletions ...are among the strongest evidence yet
for the argument that dialogue requires coordina-
tionevenatthesub-sententiallevel”(italicsorigi-
nal).
Broadly speaking, there have been two types,
or levels, of explanations of split utterances of-
fered; pragmatic accounts and processing ac-
counts. Pragmatic accounts are favoured by Con-
versational Analysts, with various aspects of split
utterancesanalysed. However,inlinewithCAas-
sumptions, these analyses are almost exclusively
concerned with the conditions under which split
utterances can occur. Lerner (1991), for ex-
ample, identifies a number of ‘compound’ turn-
constructional units, such as the IF-THEN con-
struction (whereby the second participant is in
some sense licensed to provide the THEN part of
the structure). However, Lerner’s insistence on
identifyingthecircumstancesinwhichsplitutter-
ancesusuallyoccurmissestheimportantgeneral-
isationthat,syntactically,theycanbeanywherein
astring(hisopportunisticcompletions). Hisclaim
that an anticipatory completion is ordinarily “de-
signedasasyntacticcontinuationoftheutterance
partitfollowsatthepointofonset”,seemstohold
forallsplitutterances.
The occurrence of split utterances also has im-
plications for the organisation of turn-taking, as
outlinedinSacksetal.(1974). AccordingtoSche-
gloff (1995), turn-taking operates, not on individ-
ual conversational participants, but on ‘parties’.
Forexample,ifacouplearetalkingtoathirdper-
son, they may organise their turns as if they are
one ‘party’, rather than two separate individuals.
Lerner (1991) suggests that split utterances can
clarify the formation of such parties; “collabora-
tivelyproducedsentencesrevealarelationshipbe-
tween syntax and social organisation. It provides
evidenceofhowsyntaxcanbemobilisedtoorgan-
iseparticipantsinto“groups”.”
The processing approach towards split utter-
ances is exemplified by the interactive alignment
model of Pickering and Garrod (2004). They
claimthat;
...it should be more-or-less as easy
to complete someone else’s sentence as
one’sown,andthisdoesappeartobethe
case.
(PickeringandGarrod,2004,p186)
According to this model, speaker and listener
ought to be interchangeable at any point, and this
isalsothestancetakenbythegrammaticalframe-
work of Dynamic Syntax (Cann et al., 2005). In
DynamicSyntax(DS),parsingandproductionare
taken to use exactly the same mechanisms, lead-
ingtoapredictionthatsplitutterancesoughttobe
strikingly natural (Purver et al., 2006). Addition-
ally,forathirdpersontoprocessanutterancethat
appearstocomefromtwoseparatespeakersought
notbemoredifficultthanprocessingthesameut-
terancefromasinglespeaker,regardlessofwhere
inastringthechangeoveroccurs.
According to Poesio and Rieser (In prepara-
tion),“thestudyofsentencecompletionscanshed
light on a number of central issues...this type of
data may be used to compare competing claims
about coordination – i.e. whether it is best ex-
plainedwithanintentionalmodellikeClark’s...or
with a model based on simpler alignment models
like Pickering and Garrod’s.” As they see inten-
tionsascrucialtodialoguemanagement,theycon-
clude that a model which accounts for intentions
(such as their PTT account) better captures their
task specific split utterance data (See Poncin and
Rieser (2006) for details of the German data they
aremodelling).
If this is the case, it ought to be more difficult
to process an utterance that appears to be split
between speakers, as opposed to one that comes
fromonesource,becausetheintentionsofthetwo
different agents have to be considered in arriving
at an interpretation, and they may appear to have
formeda‘party’withrespecttothesubjectofthe
utterance. Additionally it ought to be more dis-
ruptive to the conversation if the utterance is at-
tributed to someone other than the person who
genuinelycontributedit,becausethehearerwould
falselyattributeintentionstothewronginterlocu-
tor. This ought to be especially clear in cases
where the ‘conversational momentum’ appears to
be with the ‘wrong’ interlocutor. Contrarily, if a
processingmodelsuchastheinteractivealignment
model is correct, then no such differences should
80
beobserved3.
Totestthesepredictions,anexperimentwasset
uptoaltergenuinesingle-turnutterancesintosplit
utterances at an arbitrary point in the string. Dif-
ferenttypesofinterventionwereintroduced,ina2
x2factorialdesign,inordertoseparateouttheef-
fects of an utterance appearing to come from two
differentparticipantsfromeffectscausedbyanap-
parentchangeoffloor.
2 Method
The effects of seeing an utterance split between
speakers or not were tested using the Dialogue
Experimentation Toolkit (DiET) chat tool, as de-
scribedinHealeyetal.(2003),whichenablesdia-
loguestobeexperimentallymanipulated.
The DiET chat tool allows interventions to be
introducedintoadialogueinrealtime, thuscaus-
ing a minimum of disruption to the natural ‘flow’
oftheconversation. Inthiscase,anumberofgen-
uineturnsinathreewayconversationwereartifi-
ciallysplitintotwosections,withbothpartseither
appearingtooriginatefromthegenuinesource,or
oneorbothpartsbeingfalselyattributedtoanother
participant.
2.1 Materials
2.1.1 The
Balloon Task
The balloon task is an ethical dilemma re-
quiring agreement on which of three passengers
shouldbethrownoutofahotairballoonthatwill
crash, killing all the passengers, if one is not sac-
rificed. Thechoiceisbetweenascientist,whobe-
lieves he is on the brink of discovering a cure for
cancer, a7monthspregnantwoman, andherhus-
band, thepilot. Thistaskwaschosenonthebasis
thatitshouldstimulatediscussion, leadingtodia-
loguesofasufficientlengthtoenableanadequate
numberofinterventions.
2.1.2 The
DiET Chat Tool
The DiET chat tool itself is a custom built java
application consisting of two main components,
which will be outlined in turn; the user interface,
andtheserverconsole.
3Thisis,ofcourse,anoversimplification,andnotethatin
contrast to pragmatic accounts, no claims are made regard-
inghigherleveldiscourseeffectsofthesplitutterance,asthe
focus is on the mechanisms which allow split utterances to
occur. Additional mechanisms could of course be posited in
processingmodelstoaccountforanysuchdifferences.
2.1.3 User
interface
The user interface is designed to look and feel
likeinstantmessagingapplicationse.g. Microsoft
Messenger. It consists of a display split into two
windows,withastatusbar,indicatingwhetherany
other participant(s) are actively typing, between
them (see figure 1). The ongoing dialogue, con-
sistingofboththenicknameofthecontributorand
their transmitted text, is shown in the upper win-
dow. In the lower window, participants type and
revise their contributions, before sending them to
their co-participants. All key presses are time-
stampedandstoredbytheserver.
Figure 1: The user interface chat window (as
viewedbyparticipant‘sam’)
2.1.4 Server
Console
All text entered is passed to the server, from
where it is relayed to the other participants, not
relayeddirectlybetweenparticipants. Priortobe-
ingrelayed,someturnsarealteredbytheserverto
createfakesplitutterances.
This is carried out automatically such that a
genuine single-person turn is split around a space
character near the centre of the string. The part
of the turn before the space is relayed first, fol-
lowedbyashortdelayduringwhichnootherturns
may be sent. This is followed by the part of the
turn after the space, as if they were in fact two
quite separate, consecutive turns. In every case,
theserverproducestwovariantsofthesplitutter-
ance,relayingdifferentinformationtobothrecip-
ients. Each time an intervention is triggered, one
of the two recipients receives both parts from the
actualsourceoftheutterance(henceforthreferred
to as an AA-split). The other recipient receives
one of three, more substantial, manipulations; the
first half could appear to be from the actual ori-
gin with the second part of the split appearing to
originatefromtheotherrecipient(anAB-split),or
81
the inverse could be the case (a BA-split), or both
partscouldbewronglyattributedtotheotherpar-
ticipant (a BB-split). This design was in order to
separate the effects of a change in conversational
momentum(floorchange)fromtheeffectsofsplit-
ting per se, hence the inclusion of the BB condi-
tion where who apparently has the floor is altered
without the utterance being attributable to differ-
entparticipants. Thiscontrastisshownintable1.
Table1: Comparisonofsplittypes
Atypes:
Shouldwestartnow
Bsees(AAintervention):
A:Shouldwe
A:startnow
Csees(oneof):
ABintervention: BAintervention: BBintervention:
A:Shouldwe B:Shouldwe B:Shouldwe
B:startnow A:startnow B:startnow
Theinterventionistriggeredevery10turns,and
restricted such that the participant who receives
the non AA-split is rotated (to ensure that each
participantonlyseesanyofthemoresubstantially
manipulatedinterventionsevery30turns). Which
of the three non AA-splits they see (AB, BA or
BB)is,however,generatedrandomly.
2.2 Subjects
41maleand19femalenativeEnglishspeakingun-
dergraduatestudentswererecruitedfortheexper-
iment, in groups of three to ensure that they were
familiar with each other. All had previous expe-
rience of internet chat software such as Microsoft
Messenger and each was paid £7.00 for their par-
ticipation.
2.3 Procedure
Each of the triad of subjects was sat in front of a
desktop computer in separate rooms, so that they
were unable to see or hear each other. Subjects
were asked to follow the on screen instructions,
and input their e-mail address and their username
(the nickname that would identify their contribu-
tions in the chat window). When they had en-
tered these, a blank chat window appeared, and
theyweregivenasheetofpaperwiththetaskde-
scription on. Participants were instructed to read
this carefully, and begin discussing the task with
their colleagues via the chat window once they
had done so. They were told that the experi-
mentwasinvestigatingthedifferencesincommu-
nication when conducted using a text only inter-
faceasopposedtoface-to-face. Additionally,sub-
jectswereinformedthattheexperimentwouldlast
approximately 20-30 minutes, and that all turns
would be recorded anonymously for later analy-
sis. Once all three participants had been logged
on, the experimenter went to sit at the server ma-
chine,afourthdesktopPCoutofsightofallthree
subjects, and made no further contact with them
untilatleast20minutesofdialoguehadbeencar-
riedout.
3 Results
A post experimental questionnaire and debrief-
ingshowedthatparticipantsfelttheconversations
went as smoothly as face-to-face dialogue. With
the exception of one subject, who had taken part
in a previous chat tool experiment and was there-
fore aware that interventions may occur, none of
the participants reported awareness of any inter-
ventions.
As production and receipt of turns sometimes
occurs in overlap in text chat, it is not possible
to say definitively when one turn is made in di-
rectresponsetoanother4. Wethereforechosetwo
separate measures; next turn – the first turn, by
thefirstrecipienttostartandcompletearesponse,
after receipt of the intervention, and global – all
theturnsproducedbybothrecipientsbetweenthe
mostrecentinterventionandthenextintervention,
averaged to produce one data point per recipient
per intervention. This means that in the next turn
condition,onlyonedatapointisanalysedforeach
intervention, despite two different people seeing
an intervention (and both usually producing a re-
sponse). This was to try and isolate the initial re-
sponsetoanintervention;fortheotherpersonwho
sawa split but did not respondfirst, it is not clear
if they are responding to the split utterance, or to
4Inonlinechat,participantscancomposetheirnextturns
simultaneously,andturnsunderconstructionwhenanotheris
received can be subsequently revised, prior to transmission.
Thismeansthatagenuineresponsetoasplitutterancemight
have a negative start time. However, the inclusion of cases
wherethewholeturnwasconstructedafterreceivingthesplit
(anarbitrarycut-offpoint,whichwouldcatchsometurnsthat
wereresponsestoearlierturnsinthedialogue,andmisssome
which were begun before the intervention was received and
subsequently revised) should impose the same level of noise
inallcases.
82
the person who already responded to the split ut-
terance. In the global condition, in contrast, there
are two datapoints for each intervention (one for
eachoftheparticipantswhosawasplitutterance).
Of the 253 interventions to which at least one
recipient responded, 89 were AA/AB splits, 99
wereAA/BAsplitsand65AA/BBsplits. Table2
showsthenvaluesineachcase.
Both next turn and global measures were anal-
ysed according to two factors in a 2 x 2 factorial
design; split –whetherbothpartsoftheutterance
had appeared to come from the same person, or
from different sources ([AA and BB] vs [AB and
BA]), and floor change – who appeared to have
produced the second part of the split, the genuine
source, or the other participant ([AA and BA] vs
[ABandBB]).
Measuresselectedforanalysisweretypingtime
of turn (The time, in milliseconds, between the
first key press in a turn and sending the turn to
theotherparticipantsbyhittingthereturnkey)and
lengthofturnincharactersasmeasuresofproduc-
tion; deletes per character (The number of keyed
deletes plus one (to prevent null values) divided
by the total number of characters) as a measure
of revisions; and typing time per character as a
measure of speed. Data in tables are displayed in
the original scale of measurement. However, as
inspection of the data showed that they were not
normally distributed, logarithmic transformations
(using loge) were applied to the data prior to all
formalanalyses.
2 x 2 ANOVAs show a main effect of floor
change on the typing time of turn (see table 2).
This holds for next turns (F(3,249) = 7.13, p <
0.05) and globally (F(3,486) = 3.78, p < 0.05),
with participants taking longer over their turns in
the AB and BB conditions. There was no main
effect of split, and no effect of interaction. This
effectisgreaterlocallythanglobally,withpartici-
pantswhorespondfirstafterseeingafloorchange
condition taking more than 40% longer over their
turnsthanthosewhosawanon-floorchangecon-
dition. Globally the difference is in the order of
10%.
There was a main effect of split on the number
of deletes per character , which also held both in
thenextturncondition(F(3,249) = 6.26,p < 0.05)
and globally (F(3,486) = 9.23, p < 0.05), with
subjects seeing a split condition (AB or BA) us-
ing fewer deletes per character than those seeing
a non-split condition (see table 3). There was no
main effect of floor change or interaction effect.
This effect is also stronger in the next turn con-
dition, with those not seeing a cross-person split
usingover50%moredeletes. Intheglobalcondi-
tion,thisdifferenceisstill40%,thoughtheoverall
proportionofdeletesisapproximately25%lower,
from0.334percharacterinthenextturncondition
to0.244globally.
Table 2: Typing time of turn by type of interven-
tion
Condition Mean(s.d.) N(possN)
NextTurn
AA 9475.54 (12258.5) 136 (253)
AB 14560.70 (18863.9) 37 (89)
BA 6968.24 (6437.0) 51 (99)
BB 14812.59 (20367.8) 29 (65)
Global
AA 11122.27 (14413.5) 246 (253)
AB 12500.98 (10944.6) 89 (89)
BA 9800.77 (8810.3) 92 (99)
BB 11561.67 (10138.4) 63 (65)
Table3: Deletespercharacterbytypeofinterven-
tion
Condition Mean(s.d.)
NextTurn
AA 0.435 (1.63)
AB 0.152 (0.30)
BA 0.202 (0.25)
BB 0.324 (0.61)
Global
AA 0.288 (0.83)
AB 0.192 (0.28)
BA 0.145 (0.18)
BB 0.287 (0.37)
Additional analyses showed an effect of floor
change on length of turn in characters (table 4)
in the next turn condition (F(3,249) = 5.57, p <
0.05)suchthatturnsarelongerintheABandBB
conditions(notethatthoughthismightbethought
tobeconfoundedbythetypingtimeofturn,asyou
would expect longer turns to take longer to type,
therearenosignificanteffectswhenANOVAsare
performedontyping time per character). Thereis
nomaineffectofsplit,orinteractioneffect. Inthe
global condition, however, there is a main effect
ofsplit(F(3,486) = 4.08, p < 0.05)suchthatturns
are longer after seeing an utterance that appears
to be split between two different people (AB and
BA conditions). There is no main effect of floor
change,andnoeffectofinteraction.
83
As the experiment was looking for generic ef-
fects of splitting on coordination, the location of
the splits was random. A post-hoc analysis was
thereforecarriedouttoascertainwhetherthestan-
dalonecoherence(asjudgedbytheauthors)ofthe
two separate parts of the utterance was a possible
confoundingfactor. Examplesofcoherencejudge-
mentsareshownintable5.
Table 4: Length of turn in characters by type of
intervention
Condition Mean(s.d.)
NextTurn
AA 23.95 (22.0)
AB 37.76 (34.9)
BA 23.92 (18.4)
BB 26.52 (21.5)
Global
AA 26.41 (20.4)
AB 32.12 (23.9)
BA 28.27 (18.4)
BB 25.78 (13.6)
Table5: Examplesofstandalonecoherencejudge-
mentexamples
PartofSplit Coherent
First Second 1st 2nd
whatthehell isthat Y N
thewomanispregnant sheshouldstay Y Y
thesepeoplesaid youdidsomething N Y
Ithinkthisisalso thewishofthedoctor N N
2x2ANOVAsshowedthatinthenextturncon-
dition, there are no main effects of first or sec-
ond part coherence, but there was an interaction
effect of first part coherence by second part co-
herence on deletes (F(3,249) = 4.05, p < 0.05),
suchthatifbothpartsareindependentlycoherent,
or if neither part is independently coherent, there
arefewerdeletesusedintheturnimmediatelyfol-
lowingtheintervention(seetable6). Thereareno
significantglobaleffects.
Table 6: Deletes per character by firstand second
partstandalonecoherence(nextturncondition)
Coherence Mean(s.d.)
1st 2nd
Y Y 0.198 (0.38)N 0.651 (2.26)
N Y 0.304 (0.66)N 0.206 (0.30)
Runninga2x2x2x2ANOVAwiththesead-
ditionalfactorsdoesnotalterthemaineffectsob-
servedforfloorchangeorsplit,asdetailedabove.
There are no additional interaction effects on any
ofthemeasures.
4 Discussion
Asthisisthefirstexperimentalstudyintosplitut-
terancesusingtheDiETchattool,whatfollowsis
necessarily exploratory. This discussion presents
our current hypotheses as to how best to interpret
thedata,assummarisedintable7,below.
Table7: Summaryofsignificanteffects
Effectof Condition onanddirection
Floor NextTurn TypingTime
Change andGlobal (AB∧BB) > (AA∧BA)
Floor NextTurn NumberofChars
Change (AB∧BB) > (AA∧BA)
Split NextTurn Deletes
andGlobal (AA∧BB) > (AB∧BA)
Split Global NumberofChars
(AB∧BA) > (AA∧BB)
Takinglongerovertheproductionofaturn(in-
dependently of typing speed) indicates a lack of
confidence in the conversation (misattributing the
second part of the utterance thus reducing confi-
dence),andisalsoindicativeoflocalorganisation
ofturn-taking. Ifaparticipantwhohasseenafloor
changeintervention(ParticipantC)respondsfirst,
thentheymaybetakinglongerovertheirturnsbe-
causethereislesspressureonthemtotakeaturn.
ThisisbecauseoftheC’sexpectations. Theywill
falselybelievethatthefakesource(ParticipantB)
has just completed a turn, and will therefore not
expect them to take the floor, and the genuine
source (Participant A) will not be taking the floor
becausetheyhavejustcompletedaturn(thoughC
doesnotknowthis). Itisprobablethatintheturn
immediatelyfollowingafloorchangeintervention
both these factors are at play, whereas globally it
istheweakereffectofgenericconfidencelossthat
is observed. This compounding of effects in the
nextturnconditionwouldalsohelpexplainthedi-
vergent effects on the length of turn in characters
innextturnandglobalconditions.
Regardlessoftheprecisereasonsforit, thisef-
fectoffloorchangeontypingtimeclearlydemon-
strates that changing the apparent speaker is dis-
ruptive, perhaps because it alters the forward mo-
84
mentumoftheconversation.
More interestingly, independently of a change
offloor,seeinganutterancethatappearstobesplit
between speakers also has an impact on the con-
versation, seen in the amount of revision under-
takeninformulatingaresponse(deletes). Onerea-
son why participants might worry less about pre-
cisely formulating their turns following a cross-
personsplitisthattheproductionofacross-person
splitcouldhavetheeffectontherecipientofsug-
gestingthatthetwootherparticipantshaveformed
a‘party’(Schegloff, 1995)withrespecttothede-
cision of who to throw out of the balloon. This
might be understood as signalling the formation
ofastrongcoalitionbetweentheothertwopartic-
ipants, therefore making the recipient behave as
though they are resigned to the decision of this
coalition. Thisisnotthesameastheeffectonthe
typing time of turn, whereby participants are less
rushedwhenseeingachangeoffloor. Deletes,on
theotherhand,demonstratehowcarefullypartici-
pantsareconstructingtheirturns. Excerpt1,taken
from the transcripts shows an example where this
appearstobethecase.
Excerpt 1 AB-Split showing apparent coalition
between ‘Bhups’ and ‘Dan’ (‘fake’ part of split
showninbold)
Bhups: andhecantellhisformula
Dan: to tom and susie
Ifwetakesplitutterancesasanindicatorofco-
ordination then it is likely that if we believe our
two conversational partners to be in coordination,
wewillworrylessaboutpreciselyformulatingour
owncontributions. Thisalsobacksuptheideathat
peoplearenotinterchangeable.
The interaction of first and second part coher-
ence also underlines the effect of split on revi-
sions as outlined above. In the case were both
parts of the split could potentially stand as inde-
pendent utterances, they are treated as such and
thenumberofdeletespercharacterisinlinewith
the global average (i.e. they are treated as nor-
mal dialogue). In the other non ambiguous case,
where neither part could be interpreted as an ut-
terance on its own, there are also fewer deletes,
in line with the result that there are fewer deletes
in strong split cases. Interestingly, the most dis-
ruptivecaseisthatwherethefirstpartcouldhave
been a standalone utterance, but the second part
could not. This could be seen as analogous to a
garden path effect, and provides some indication
thatthatthebuildingupofinterpretationsisincre-
mental, and not concerned with who supplies the
input.
These results do not, of course, prejudice the
claim that, at a purely mechanistic level, people
couldanticipatethestructuresneededtocomplete
a turn, as the interactive alignment model sug-
gests,becausetheyarenotconcernedwiththeac-
tual production of a split utterance, rather on the
effectithasontheconversation. Theydoindicate
that in terms of the effects of seeing split utter-
ances, the pragmatic approach offers a more fea-
sible level of analysis. For example, if we wish
to treat a jointly produced split utterance as sig-
nalling especially strong alignment, then we need
toaccountformorethansimplysyntax.
There is an issue with the design of the exper-
iment which means that the floor change effects
might be caused by a confounding variable; in
essence, because one of the recipients always re-
ceived an AA-split, in the cases which have been
labelled as cases of floor change, the two recipi-
entswillhavebeenleftwiththeimpressionthata
different person made the final contribution. This
means that there may well be a an effect of con-
founded listener expectation (though see Schober
and Brennan (2003) for discussion), although it
should be noted that this does not have any bear-
ing on the observed differences after an utterance
split between speakers. It is also possible that
split utterances might be particularly marked in a
chat environment, though preliminary results of a
corpusstudyshowthat,perhapssurprisingly,split
utterances also occur naturally and as frequently
in text-based chat (Eshghi, in prep) as they do in
face-to-face dialogue (Purver et al., 2009). Be-
cause of these issues, and the already noted po-
tential problems of linearity in text-based chat,
a follow-up study using a character-by-character
chattoolinterfaceisunderway. Thismoredirectly
enforces turn-taking, as it does not allow partici-
pants to formulate their turn before communicat-
ingit;eachcharacteristransmittedasandwhenit
isentered.
5 Conclusions
Theexperimentreportedhereofferscluestowards
an understanding of split utterances as an exam-
pleofdialoguephenomena,andprovidesevidence
85
thatspeakerswitchesaffectprocessingwherethey
interfere with expectations about who will speak
next and that the pragmatic effect of a split is to
suggest to other participants the formation of a
coalition or sub-‘party’. It also clearly demon-
stratesthatthistypeofexperimentprovidesafruit-
fullineoffutureresearchintheongoingattemptto
adequately characterise dialogue, though further
developmentsareneeded.
References
H. Branigan, M. Pickering, and A. Cleland. 2000.
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition,
75(2):13–25.
H.Branigan,M.Pickering,J.Pearson,J.McLean,and
C. Nass. 2003. Syntactic alignment between com-
puters and people: The role of belief about mental
states. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fifth Annual
Conference of theCognitive Science Society.
H.Branigan,M.Pickering,J.McLean,andA.Stewart.
2006. The role of local and global syntactic struc-
ture in language production: Evidence from syn-
tactic priming. Language and cognitive processes,
21(7-8):974–1010.
R. Cann, R. Kempson, and L. Marten. 2005. The Dy-
namics of Language. Elsevier,Oxford.
H.Clark. 1996. Using Language. CambridgeUniver-
sityPress.
A. Eshghi. in prep. Uncommon ground: the distri-
bution of dialogue contexts. Ph.D. thesis, Depart-
mentofComputer Science, QueenMaryUniversity
ofLondon.
A. Fox et al. 2007. Principles shaping grammati-
cal practices: an exploration. Discourse Studies,
9(3):299.
M. Hayashi. 1999. Where Grammar and Interac-
tionMeet: AStudyofCo-ParticipantCompletionin
JapaneseConversation. Human Studies,22(2):475–
499.
P. G. T. Healey, M. Purver, J. King, J. Ginzburg, and
G. J. Mills. 2003. Experimenting with clarifica-
tionindialogue. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
M. Helasvuo. 2004. Shared syntax: the gram-
mar of co-constructions. Journal of Pragmatics,
36(8):1315–1336.
G. Lerner and T. Takagi. 1999. On the place
of linguistic resources in the organization of talk-
in-interaction: A co-investigation of English and
Japanese grammatical practices. Journal of Prag-
matics,31(1):49–75.
G. Lerner. 1991. On the syntax of sentences-in-
progress. Language inSociety,pages441–458.
G. Lerner. 1996. On the semi-permeable character
of grammatical units in conversation: Conditional
entry into the turn space of another speaker. In
E. Ochs, E. A. Schegloff, and S. A. Thompson,
editors, Interaction and grammar, pages 238–276.
CambridgeUniversityPress.
G. Lerner. 2004. Collaborative turn sequences. In
Conversation analysis: Studies from the first gener-
ation,pages225–256.JohnBenjamins.
M. Oelschlaeger and J. Damico. 1998. Joint produc-
tions as a conversational strategy in aphasia. Clini-
cal linguistics & phonetics,12(6):459–480.
M. Pickering and S. Garrod. 2004. Toward a mech-
anistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences,27:169–226.
M.PoesioandH.Rieser. Inpreparation. Completions,
coordination,andalignmentindialogue. toappear.
K. Poncin and H. Rieser. 2006. Multi-speaker utter-
ances and co-ordination in task-oriented dialogue.
Journal of Pragmatics,38(5):718–744.
M. Purver, R. Cann, and R. Kempson. 2006.
Grammars as parsers: Meeting the dialogue chal-
lenge. Research on Language and Computation,
4(2-3):289–326.
M. Purver, C. Howes, P. G. Healey, and E. Gre-
goromichelaki. 2009. Split utterances in dialogue:
acorpusstudy. In SigDial 2009 workshop proceed-
ings.
H.Sacks,E.Schegloff,andG.Jefferson. 1974. Asim-
plest systematics for the organization of turn-taking
forconversation. Language,pages696–735.
E. Schegloff. 1995. Parties and talking together: Two
ways in which numbers are significant for talk-in-
interaction. Situated order: Studies in the social
organization of talk and embodied activities, pages
31–42.
M. Schober and S. Brennan. 2003. Processes of in-
teractive spoken discourse: The role of the partner.
Handbook of discourse processes,pages123–64.
B. Szczepek. 2000. Formal Aspects of Col-
laborative Productions in English Conversa-
tion. Interaction and Linguistic Structures
(InLiSt), http://www.uni-potsdam.de/u/
inlist/issues/17/index.htm.
86

