Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 40–47,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c©2009 ACL and AFNLP
Assas-Band, an Affix-Exception-List Based Urdu Stemmer  
 
Qurat-ul-Ain Akram  
Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing  
NUCES, Pakistan 
ainie.akram@nu.edu.pk 
Asma Naseer  
Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing  
NUCES, Pakistan 
asma.naseer@nu.edu.pk
Sarmad Hussain  
Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing  
NUCES, Pakistan 
sarmad.hussain@nu.edu.pk
 
Abstract 
 
Both Inflectional and derivational morphology lead 
to multiple surface forms of a word. Stemming 
reduces these forms back to its stem or root, and is 
a very useful tool for many applications.  There has 
not been any work reported on Urdu stemming.  
The current work develops an Urdu stemmer or 
Assas-Band and improves the performance using 
more precise affix based exception lists, instead of 
the conventional lexical lookup employed for 
developing stemmers in other languages.  Testing 
shows an accuracy of 91.2%.  Further 
enhancements are also suggested. 
 
1. Introduction 
A stemmer extracts stem from various forms of 
words, for example words actor, acted, and acting all 
will reduce to stem act.  Stemmers are very useful for 
a variety of applications which need to acquire root 
form instead of inflected or derived forms of words.  
This is especially true for Information Retrieval tasks, 
which search for the base forms, instead of inflected 
forms.  The need of stemmers becomes even more 
pronounced for languages which are morphologically 
rich, and have a variety of inflected and derived 
forms. 
Urdu is spoken by more than a 100 million people 
(accessed from http://www.ethnologue.com/show_ 
language.asp ?code =urd). It is the national language 
of Pakistan and a state language of India.   It is an 
Indo-Aryan language, and is morphologically rich. 
Currently there is no stemmer for Urdu, however 
recent work has shown that it may have much utility 
for a variety of applications, much wider than some 
other languages.  Due to the morphological richness 
of Urdu, its application to information retrieval tasks 
is quite apparent.  However, there are also a few other 
areas of application, including automatic 
diacritization for text to speech systems, chunking, 
word sense disambiguation and statistical machine 
translation.  In most of these cases, stemming 
addresses the sparseness of data caused by multiple 
surface forms which are caused mostly by inflections, 
though also applicable to some derivations. 
Due to urgent need for some applications, an Urdu 
stemmer called Assas-Band
1, has been developed.  
The current work explains the details of Assas-Band 
and its enhancements using exceptions lists instead of 
lexical lookup methods, to improve its accuracy.  
Finally results are reported and discussed.  
 
2. Literature Review 
Urdu is rich in both  inflectional and derivational 
morphology. Urdu verbs inflect to show agreement 
for number, gender, respect and case.  In addition to 
these factors, verbs in Urdu also have different 
inflections for infinitive, past, non-past, habitual and 
imperative forms.   All these forms (twenty in total) 
for a regular verb are duplicated for transitive and 
causative (di-transitive) forms, thus giving a total of 
more than sixty inflected variations.  Urdu nouns also 
show agreement for number, gender and case.  In 
addition, they show diminutive and vocative 
affixation.  Moreover, the nouns show derivational 
changes into adjectives and nouns.  Adjectives show 
similar agreement changes for number, gender and 
case. A comprehensive computational analysis of 
Urdu morphology is given by Hussain (2004).   
Stemmers may be developed by using either rule-
based or statistical approaches. Rule-based stemmers 
require prior morphological knowledge of the 
language, while statistical stemmers use corpus to 
calculate the occurrences of stems and affixes. Both 
rule-based and statistical stemmers have been 
developed for a variety of languages.   
A rule-based stemmer is developed for English by 
Krovetz (1993) using machine-readable dictionaries.  
Along with a dictionary, rules for inflectional and 
derivational morphology are defined. Due to high 
dependency on dictionary the systems lacks 
consistency (Croft and Xu 1995). In Porter Stemmer 
(Porter 1980) the algorithm enforces some 
terminating conditions of a stem. Until any of the 
conditions is achieved, it keeps on removing endings 
of the word iteratively. Thabet has proposed a 
stemmer that performs stemming of classical Arabic 
                                                           
1
 In Urdu Assas means stem and Assas-Band means 
stemmer 
40
in Quran (Thabet 2004) using stop-word list. The 
main algorithm for prefix stemming creates lists of 
words from each surah. If words in the list do not 
exist in stop-word list then prefixes are removed. The 
accuracy of this algorithm is 99.6% for prefix 
stemming and 97% for postfix stemming. An 
interesting stemming approach is proposed by Paik 
and Parui (2008), which presents a general analysis of 
Indian languages. With respect to the occurrences of 
consonants and vowels, characters are divided into 
three categories. Different equivalence classes are 
made of all the words in the lexicon using the match 
of prefix of an already defined length. This technique 
is used for Bengali
2, Hindi and Marathi languages. A 
rule-based stemming algorithm is proposed for 
Persian language by Sharifloo and Shamsfard (2008), 
which uses bottom up approach for stemming. The 
algorithm identifies substring (core) of words which 
are derived from some stem and then reassembles 
these cores with the help of some rules. Morpheme 
clusters are used in rule matching procedure. An anti-
rule procedure is also employed to enhance the 
accuracy. The algorithm gives 90.1 % accuracy. 
Besides rule-based stemmers there are a number of 
statistical stemmers for different languages. Croft and 
Xu provide two methods for stemming i.e. Corpus-
Specific Stemming and Query-Specific Stemming 
(Croft and Xu 1995). Corpus-Specific Stemming 
gathers unique words from the corpus, makes 
equivalence classes, and after some statistical 
calculations and reclassification makes a dictionary. 
Query-Based Stemming utilizes dictionary that is 
created by Corpus-Based Stemming. Thus the usual 
process of stemming is replaced with dictionary 
lookup.  Kumar and Siddiqui (2008) propose an 
algorithm for Hindi stemmer which calculates n-
grams of the word of length l. These n-grams are 
treated as postfixes. The algorithm calculates 
probabilities of stem and postfix. The combination of 
stem and postfix with highest probability is selected. 
The algorithm achieves 89.9% accuracy. Santosh 
et.al. (2007) presents three statistical techniques for 
stemming Telugu language. In the first technique the 
word is divided into prefix and postfix. Then scores 
are calculated on the basis of frequency of prefix, 
length of prefix, frequency of postfix, and length of 
postfix. The accuracy of this approach is 70.8%. The 
second technique is based on n-grams. Words are 
clustered using n-grams. Within the cluster a smallest 
word is declared as the stem of the word. The 
algorithm gives 65.4% accuracy. In the third 
approach a successive verity is calculated for each 
                                                           
2
 Also see Islam et al. (2007) for Bengali stemming 
word’s prefix. This approach increases accuracy to 
74.5%.  
Looking at various techniques, they can generally 
be divided into rule based or statistical methods.  Rule 
based methods may require cyclical application of 
rules.  Stem and/or affix look-ups are needed for the 
rules and may be enhanced by maintaining a lexicon. 
Statistical stemmers are dependent on corpus size, 
and their performance is influenced by morphological 
features of a language. Morphologically richer 
languages require deeper linguistic analysis for better 
stemming. Three different statistical approaches for 
stemming Telugu (Kumar and Murthy 2007) words 
reveal very low accuracy as the language is rich in 
morphology. On the other hand rule-based techniques 
when applied to morphologically rich languages 
reveal accuracy up to 99.6% (Thabet 2004).  Like 
other South Asian languages, Urdu is also 
morphologically rich.  Therefore, the current work 
uses a rule based approach with a variation from 
lexical look-up, to develop a stemmer for Urdu.  The 
next sections discuss the details of development and 
testing results of this stemmer. 
 
3. Corpus Collection 
An important phase of developing Assas-Band is  
corpus collection. For this four different lexica and 
corpora
3
: C1 (Sajjad 2007), C2
4, C3 (Online Urdu 
Dictionary, available at www.crulp.org/oud) and C4 
(Ijaz and Hussain 2007) are used for analysis and 
testing. Furthermore, prefix and postfix lists
5
 are also 
used during the analysis. The summary of each of the 
resources is given in table 1.  
 
Table 1: Corpora Words Statistics 
 
4. Methodology 
The proposed technique uses some conventions 
for the Urdu stemmer Assas-Band. The stem returned 
by this system is the meaningful root e.g. the stem of 
nullnullnullnullںnull  larkiyan (girls) is 5nullnullnull   larki (girl) and not the 
کnullnull larak  (boy/girl-hood; not a surface from). It also 
maintains distinction between the masculine and 
                                                           
3
 Available from CRULP (www.crulp.org) 
4
 Unpublished, internally developed by CRULP 
5
 Internally developed at  CRULP 
Corpus Total No. of 
Words 
Unique 
Words 
C1  63,298 10,604 
C2  96,890 7,506 
C3  149,486 149,477 
C4  19,296,846 50,000 
41
feminine forms of the stem. Assas-Band gives the 
stem nullnullnullnull larka (boy) for word ںnullnullnullnull larkon (boys) and 
stem 5nullnullnull  larki (girl) for nullnullnullnullںnull   larkiyan (girls). The 
reason for maintaining the gender difference is its 
usability for other tasks in Urdu, e.g. machine 
translation, automatic diacritization etc.  The word 
can easily be converted to  underlying stem (e.g. کnullnull 
larak  (boy/girl-hood)), if needed. 
Assas-Band is trained to work with Urdu words, 
though it can also process foreign words, e.g. 
Persian, Arabic and English words, to a limited 
extent. Proper nouns are considered stems, though 
only those are handled which appear in the corpora.    
 
Figure 1: Flow Chart for the Stemming Process 
 
An Urdu word is composed of a sequence of 
prefixes, stem and postfixes. A word can be divided 
into (Prefix)-Stem-(Postfix). Assas-Band extracts 
Stem from the given word, and then converts it to 
surface form, as per requirement.  
 
The algorithm of 
the system is as follows. First the prefix (if it exists) 
is removed from the word. This returns the Stem-
(Postfix) sequence.  Then postfix (if it exists) is 
removed and Stem is extracted. The post-processing 
step (if required) is performed at the end to generate 
the surface form.  
However, while applying affix rules for any 
word, the algorithm checks for exceptional cases and 
applies the affix stripping rules only if the exceptional 
cases are not found. This is different from other 
methods which first strip and then repair.   
The algorithm for Assas-Band is given in Figure 
1 and explained in more detail below. 
Prefix Extraction: To remove the prefix from 
the word, first it is checked whether the input word 
exists in the Prefix-Global-Exceptional-List (PrGEL). 
If it exists in PrGEL, then it means that the word has 
an initial string of letters which matches a prefix but 
is part of the stem and thus should not be stripped.  If 
the word does not exist in PrGEL, then prefix rules 
list is looked up.  If an applicable prefix is found, 
starting from longest matching prefix to shorter 
prefix, appropriate rule is applied to separate prefix 
from stem-postfix. Both parts of the word are retained 
for further processing and output.  
Postfix Extraction: This process separates the 
postfix from word and performs the post-processing 
step, if required, for generating the surface form. 
First the remaining Stem-(Postfix) is looked up in 
a general Postfix-Global-Exceptional-List (PoGEL). 
If the word exists in the list, then it is marked as the 
stem. If the word does not exist in this list, it indicates 
that a possible postfix is attached. Postfix matching is 
then performed.  The candidate postfix rules are 
sorted in descending order according to the postfix 
length. In addition, a Postfix-Rule-Exception-List 
(PoREL) is also maintained for each postfix.  The 
first applicable postfix from the list is taken and it is 
checked if the word to be stemmed exists in PoREL.  
If the word does not exist in PoREL, then the current 
postfix rule is applied and the Stem and Postfix are 
extracted.  If the word exists in the PoREL then the 
current postfix rule is not applied and the next postfix 
rule is considered.  This process is repeated for all 
candidate postfix rules, until a rule is applied or the 
list is exhausted. In both cases the resultant word is 
marked as Stem. 
A complete list of prefixes and postfixes are 
derived by analyzing various lexica and corpora (and 
using grammar books).  In addition, complete rule 
exception list for each postfix (PoREL), complete 
general exception list for prefixes PrGEL and general 
exception list for postfixes PoGEL are developed 
using C1, C2, C3 and C4.  PrGEL and PoGEL are 
also later extended to include all stems generated 
through this system. 
 After applying prefix and postfix rules, post 
processing is performed to create the surface form of 
the stem. The stem is looked up in the Add-Character-
Lists (ACL). There are only five lists, maintained for 
each of the following letter(s): ا ،ت ،ہ ،ی، nullnull   (yay-hay, 
choti-yah, gol-hay, tay, alif), because only these can 
be possibly added. If the stem is listed, the 
corresponding letter(s) are appended at the end to 
42
generate the surface form, else the stem is considered 
the surface form.   
Though the algorithm is straight forward, to the 
lists have been developed manually after repeated 
analysis, which has been a very difficult task, as 
explained in next section.  Some sample words in 
these lists are given in the Appendices A and B. 
 
5. Analysis Phase 
The analysis has been divided into two phases. First 
phase involved the extraction of prefixes and 
postfixes.  The second phase dealt with the 
development of Prefix and Postfix Global Exceptional 
Lists (PrGEL, PoGEL), Postfix Rule Exceptional 
Lists (PoREL) and Add Character Lists (ACL).  
These are discussed here. 
 
5.1. Extraction of Affixes  
C1 and C2 are used for the extraction of affixes. 
These corpora are POS tagged. The analysis is 
performed on 11,000 high frequency words.  The 
details of these corpora are given in Table 1. By 
looking at each word, prefixes and postfixes are 
extracted.  Words may only have a prefix e.g. ترnullnullnullnull 
bud-surat (ugly), only a postfix, e.g. تارnullnullnull tasawr-
aat (imaginations), or both prefix and postfix, e.g. 
5nullnullاnullnullnull  bud-ikhlaq-i (bad manners).  After analysis, 40 
prefixes and 300 postfixes are extracted. This list is 
merged with an earlier list of available postfixes and 
prefixes
6
. A total of 174 prefixes and 712 postfixes 
are identified. They are listed in Appendix C. In this 
phase, the post-processing rules are also extracted 
separately.  
 
5.2. Extraction of Exception and Word Lists 
The following lists are used to improve the 
accuracy of Assas-Band.  
1. Prefix and Postfix Global Exceptional Lists 
(PrGEL, PoGEL) 
2. Postfix Rule Exceptional List (PoREL) for each 
postfix 
3.  Add Character List (ACL) for each letter/sequence 
The second phase of analysis is performed to 
generate these lists.  This analysis is based on C3.   
Development of PrGEL: The PrGEL contains 
all those words from which a prefix cannot be 
extracted. The list contains words with first few 
letters which match a prefix but do not contain this 
prefix, e.g. null5nullnullnullnull  bandh-ay (tied).  This word exists in 
PrGEL to ensure that the prefix nullnull ba (with) is not 
                                                           
6
 Internally developed at CRULP 
 
removed to give invalid stem null5nullnull  ndhay.  This single 
list is maintained globally for all prefixes. 
Development of PoGEL: There are also many 
words which do not contain any postfix but their final 
few letters may match with one.  If they are not 
identified and prevented from postfix removal 
process, they may result in erroneous invalid stems.  
For example, null nullnullnullnull  hathi (elephant) may be truncated 
to nullnullnullnull hath (hand), which is incorrect removal of the 
postfix ی (letter choti-yay). All such words are kept in 
the PoGEL, and considered as a stem. This single list 
is maintained globally for all the postfixes.  
Rule Exceptional Lists: Candidate postfixes are 
applied in descending order of length.  For example, 
for the word nullnullnullnullںnulla  bastiyan (towns), the following 
postfixes can be applied: nullnullںnull  tiyan, nullںnull  yan, ںا aan 
and ں noon-gunna. 
First, if the maximal length postfix matches, it is 
stripped.  However, there are cases, when there is a 
match, but the current postfix should not be detached  
(a shorter postfix needs to be detached).  In this case a 
postfix specific list is needed to list the exceptions to 
ensure preventing misapplication of the longer 
postfix.  For this situation PoREL is maintained for 
each postfix separately. So for nullnullnullnullںnull  bastiyan 
(towns), first the maximum length postfix nullnullںnull  tiyan is 
matched. However, this creates the stem nullnull bas (bus) 
which is incorrect.    Thus, nullnullnullnullںnull  bastiyan (towns) is 
stored in the PrREL of nullnullںnull  tiyan. Due to this, this 
postfix is not extracted and the next longest postfix 
rule is applied. Even in this case nonsense stem nullnullnull 
bast is generated.  Thus, nullnullnullnullںnull  bastiyan (towns) is 
also stored in the PrREL of postfix nullںnull  yan. Next the 
postfix ںا an is applied. This yields 5nullnullnull  basti (town), 
which is correct. This checking and PrREL 
development process is manually repeated for all the 
words in the corpus.  
Add Character Lists: During second phase the 
ACLs (already developed in the first phase) are 
updated against each of the five possible letter 
sequences, i.e. ا،ت،ی،ہ،nullnull , to generate correct surface 
forms. For example, when postfix 5null  gi is removed 
from 5nullnullزnull  zindagi (life), it creates the stem nullnullز zind, 
which is not a surface form. The letter ہ hay has to be 
appended at the end to produce the correct surface 
form ہnullnullز zinda (alive).  So nullnullز zind is stored in the 
ACL of letter ہ. In the same way the lists are 
developed and maintained for the five letters 
separately. After applying a particular postfix rule on 
43
the word, the result is checked in each ACL. If the 
string is found in any of the lists then respective 
character is attached at the end.   
 
Instead of manually doing all the work, the process is 
automated using an online Urdu dictionary (OUD) 
(available at www.crulp.org/oud) using the following 
algorithm.  
 
1. Take a word from corpus. 
2. Generate all applicable rules. 
3. Sort all rules in descending order according to the 
maximum length of each. 
4. Extract uppermost rule from the rules list. 
5. Apply extracted rule on the word. Check 
remaining word’s existence in the dictionary. 
a. If remaining word exists in the dictionary, store 
that original word in the respective rule’s Stem 
List and stop the loop. 
b. Otherwise store original word in the Rule 
Exceptional List of the respective rule and go to 
Step 4 for the next rule. 
6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 until 
a. Stop condition (5a) occurs, or 
b. All the generated rules have been traversed. 
7. If termination of the loop is due to step 6b, then 
the word is stored in the Global Exceptional List 
which is universal for all the rules. 
8. Repeat step 1-7 for all the words in the corpus. 
 
The above algorithm is first run for prefixes. Once a 
complete manual check is performed on the results, 
the same algorithm is applied for the postfixes.  
 
6. Manual Corrections 
Manual inspection is needed to fix the errors 
generated by the automated system.  The stem list is 
manually scanned to identify real-word errors, i.e. the 
stemming is incorrect but results in a valid word. For 
example when ری  ri postfix is applied to the word 
nullnullnullnullی  tokri (basket), the word کnullnull tok (stop) is 
obtained which exists in the dictionary but is incorrect 
stemming. The inspection is also needed to ensure 
that the distinction between the masculine and 
feminine forms of a word is maintained. As discussed 
the gender distinction is kept to ensure better use in 
other applications.   
Postfix Rule Exceptional List is scanned 
manually to check for any missing entries (in case the 
lexicon contains incomplete information about a 
word) or spurious entries (in case a word is not in the 
lexicon).  Similarly, the process is also useful in 
identifying additional missing prefixes and postfixes.  
For example, the word ںؤnullnullnullآ aansuon (tears) is 
found in the Exceptional List during manual analysis, 
because the postfix ںؤ  on was not initially identified. 
Thus, the algorithm applied the postfix ں n, leaving 
the incorrect stem ؤnullnullnullآ aansuo.  This was 
(obviously) not found in OUD dictionary, so it was 
placed in PoGEL. By manually scanning each of the 
words in this list, new postfix was found, which 
created the correct stem nullnullnullآ  aansu (tear). ACL is 
also updated by this manual analysis. 
 
7. Testing 
The test results are given in this section.   
Testing Phase 1: The corpora C1 and C2 are used 
which have combined 11,339 unique words.  The 
following table summarizes the testing results. 
 
Table 2: Initial Testing Results  
Testing Results Values
Total Number of tested words 11339
Accurately Stemmed 7241
Incorrect Stemming 4098
Accuracy Rate 64%
    
Inaccurate  Add Character  278
Inaccurate  Prefix Stripping 754
Inaccurate Postfix Stripping 1006
Errors due to Foreign Words  2107
    
Number of Times Prefix Rules Applied 1656
Correct 942
Incorrect 714
    
Number of Times Postfix Rules  Applied 5990
Correct 4984
Incorrect 1006
    
Number of Times Character Added 819
Correct 541
Incorrect 278
 
The accuracy of 64% is achieved.  Some of the 
stems created are not in the lists and are erroneous.  
They are created by invalid prefix/postfix removal.  
Analysis showed that some prefixes and postfixes 
contributed to this error rate because they were 
derived from foreign words transliterated in Urdu. For 
example ز  z postfix is correctly applied to the English 
44
word nullnullnullnullnull  ladiez (ladies)  yielding the stem nullnullnullی  ladie 
(lady). But this ز z postfix rule when applied to Urdu 
words increases the error rate. Similarly Arabic prefix 
لا  al (the), which applies to Arabic words correctly 
e.g. نآnullnullnullا al-Quran (the Quran), wrongly applies to 
Urdu words.  
Another reason for error in stemming is  
ineffective post-processing due to insufficient words 
in the lists. There are also some other sources of 
errors which are not directly associated with 
stemming but are common for Urdu corpora.  Errors 
are caused by spelling errors, including space 
character related errors (Naseem and Hussain 2007). 
There are also encoding normalization issues, which 
need to be corrected before string matching.  This is 
caused by the variation in keyboards. 
Testing Phase II: On the basis of previous result 
analysis, prefix and postfix rules which are applicable 
to only foreign words are removed from the rule lists. 
Such rules create errors in Urdu word stemming, 
while trying to cater  non-essential task of stemming 
transliterated foreign words. The foreign words found 
in C1 and C2 are stored in global lists i.e. PrGEL and 
PoGEL to ensure that they are not processed. 
 
Table 3: Test Results after Removing Foreign 
Prefixes and Postfixes Rules 
Testing Results Values 
Total Number of tested words 10418
Accurately Stemmed 9476
Incorrect Stemming 942
Accuracy Rate 90.96%
    
Inaccurate  Add Character  35
Inaccurate  Prefix Stripping 473
Inaccurate Postfix Stripping 469
Errors due to Foreign Words  0
  
Number of Times Prefix Rules 
Applied 660
Correct 187
Incorrect 473
    
Number of Times Postfix Rules  
Applied  3445
Correct 2976
Incorrect 469
    
Number of Times Character Added 626
Correct 591
Incorrect 35
As errors from C1 and C2 have been manually 
fixed, testing is again performed by using 10,418 high 
frequency Urdu words from C4 (Ijaz and Hussain 
2007). The summary of testing results is in Table 3. 
Table 3 shows that removing foreign language 
affixes improves the results significantly.  The prefix 
error rate is higher than the postfix error rate. In 
addition, the ACL has to be more comprehensive.  
There are also some errors because some words 
require both prefix and postfix to be extracted, but 
during stemming, if the prefix is wrongly applied and 
a faulty stem is generated, then the postfix is also 
incorrectly applied.     
Testing Phase III: After analyzing test results of 
the second phase, amendments are made in the 
algorithm. Following post-processing, the stem 
generated is verified in PoGEL. If it does not exist, it 
is assumed that wrong rule is applied and thus it is 
skipped and the next rule is applied.  This is repeated 
until the resulting stem is found in PoGEL. By 
implementing this methodology, the accuracy is 
enhanced from 90.96% to 91.18% for C4 corpus 
based word list as shown in Table 4. 
 
Table 4:  Test Results after Enhancing Algorithm 
Testing Results Values 
Total Number of tested words 10418
Accurately Stemmed 9499
Incorrect Stemming 919
Accuracy Rate 91.18%
    
Inaccurate  Add Character  35
Inaccurate  Prefix Stripping 473
Inaccurate Postfix Stripping 446
Errors due to Foreign Words  0
  
Number of Times Prefix Rules Applied 660
Correct 187
Incorrect 473
    
Number of Times Postfix Rules  Applied 3445
Correct 2999
Incorrect 446
    
Number of Times Character Added 626
Correct 591
Incorrect 35
 
The methodology does not affect prefix removal and 
the process of adding characters. The improvement 
made by this methodology is only in the accuracy of 
45
postfixes because this modification is only performed 
on the second phase i.e. extraction of postfixes.  
  
8. Conclusion 
The current paper presents work performed to 
develop an Urdu stemmer.  It first removes the prefix, 
then the postfix and then adds letter(s) to generate the 
surface form of the stem.  In the first two steps it uses 
exception lists if a prefix and/or postfix can be 
applied.  A successful lookup bypasses the stripping 
process.  This is different from lexical or stem look 
up in other work which triggers the stripping process.  
The current stemming accuracy can be further 
improved by  making the lists more comprehensive.  
ACL should also be maintained against each postfix 
for more accuracy.  The developed system is 
currently being used for various other applications for 
Urdu language processing, including automatic 
diacritization.   
 
Acknowledgements 
The work has been partially supported by PAN 
Localization Project grant by International 
Development Research Center (IDRC) of Canada. 
 
References 
Croft, W. B. and Xu, J. 1995. Corpus-Specific Stemming 
using Word Form Co-occurrences. In Fourth Annual 
Symposium on Document Analysis and Information 
Retrieval.  
Krovetz, R. 1993. View Morphology as an Inference 
Process. In the Proceedings of 5th International 
Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval. 
Porter, M. 1980. An Algorithm for Suffix Stripping. 
Program, 14(3): 130-137.  
Thabet, N. 2004. Stemming the Qur’an. In the Proceedings 
of the Workshop on Computational Approaches to 
Arabic Script-based Languages. 
Hussain, Sara. 2004.  Finite-State Morphological Analyzer 
for Urdu. Unpublished MS thesis, Center for Research 
in Urdu Language Processing, National University of 
Computer and Emerging Sciences, Pakistan. 
Sajjad, H. 2007. Statistical Part-of-Speech for Urdu. 
Unpublished MS Thesis, Center for Research in Urdu 
Language Processing, National University of Computer 
and Emerging Sciences, Pakistan. 
Ijaz, M and Hussain, S. 2007. Corpus Based Urdu Lexicon 
Development.  In the Proceedings of Conference on 
Language Technology (CLT07), Pakistan. 
Naseem, T., Hussain, S. 2007. Spelling Error Trends in 
Urdu. In the Proceedings of Conference on Language 
Technology (CLT07), Pakistan. 
Kumar, M. S.  and Murthy, K. N. 2007. Corpus Based 
Statistical Approach for Stemming Telugu.  Creation of 
Lexical Resources for Indian Language Computing and   
Processing (LRIL), C-DAC, Mumbai, India.  
Paik, J. H. and  Parui, S. K. 2008. A Simple Stemmer for 
Inflectional Languages. Forum for Information Retrieval 
Evaluation, 
Islam, M. Z., Uddin, M. N. and Khan, M. 2007. A Light 
Weight Stemmer for Bengali and Its Use in Spelling 
Checker.  In the Proceedings of 1st Intl. Conf. on Digital 
Comm. and Computer, Amman, Jordan. 
Sharifloo, A. A. and Shamsfard, M. 2008. A Bottom up 
Approach to Persian Stemming. In the Proceedings of 
the Third International Joint Conference on Natural 
Language Processing. Hyderabad, India. 
Kumar, A. and Siddiqui, T. 2008. An Unsupervised Hindi 
Stemmer with Heuristics Improvements.  In Proceedings 
of the Second Workshop on Analytics for Noisy 
Unstructured Text Data. 
 
  
46
Appendix A  
A.1 Postfix Rule Exceptional List Samples 
Postfix Some Exceptional Words 
تnullnulla nullnullnullnullتnullnulla
null5اa null5اnullnullnullnull,nullnullnull5ا,null5nullnullور,null5nullnullnullnulla
null5a آanullanullnull5,nullnullanullnull5,anullnullanullnull5,null5اnullnull,nullnullnullnullnull5 null,null5اnullnull,null5nullnullnulla
nullnullnulla nullاnullnullاnullnull,nullnullnullnullnullnull,nullاnullnullnullnull,nullnullnullnullnullnullnullnull,nullnullnullاnullnullnullnull,nullاnullnullnullnulla
 
A.2 Postfix Global Exception List Samples 
nullnullnullnulla nullnullوnullیa nullnullnullnulla رnullnullnullnulla واریa
نnullnullnulla nullnullnullnullnullnulla بnullnulla nullnullذa اnulla
ِ
ناnulla
nullnullnullارa nullnullnullnulla nullnullnullnullnulla وnullnullیa بnullnullnullآa
 
A.3 Prefix Global Exception List Samples 
nullnullnullnullnulla null5nullnullnullnulla nullnullnullnullںnulla nullnullnullnullnulla
nullںnullnullnulla null5رnullnullnullnulla 5nullnullnullnullnullnulla null5nullnullnulla
nullnullnullnullnullnullnulla nullnullnullnullnullnulla nullnullnullبnulla 5nullnullnullnulla
5اnullnullnullnulla 5nullnullnullnulla رادnullnulla اnullnullnullnulla
 
Appendix B 
Add Character List Samples 
 ا  Add ت  Add 
anullnullnullاa+aا=anullnullnullnullاa nullnullدnullaa+aت=anullnullتدnulla
اnullnullaa+aaا=aaاnullnullاa aشnullnulla+aت=anullnullnullnulla
اnullnullaa+aا=aاnullnullnulla anullُnulla+aت=anullnullُnulla
nullnullaa+aا=aanullnullnulla a
ّ
nullnulla+aت=aت
ّ
nullnulla
ی  Add ہ  Add 
aقnullnulla+یaa=5nullnullnulla دnullnullزآaa+aہa=ہدnullnullزآa
a nullnullاnullnullaa+ہaa=nullnullاnullnullnulla
a aدnullnullnullاa+aہa=ہدnullnullnullاa
 a
aدnullnullزآa+aہa=ہدnullnullزآa
 
Appendix C 
C.1 List of Sample Prefixes 
nullnulla nullnullnullnulla nullnulla دnullnulla nullnulla
nullnullnulla رnullnulla nullnullاa nullnulla nullnulla
nullnullnulla ناa زnullnulla nullnullnulla nullnulla
nullnulla وڈnullnulla nullnullnulla nullnulla null5اnullnulla
ہرnullnulla لnullnulla nullnulla nullnullnulla زnullnullیa
دوزa nullnullnulla اnullnullۓa nullnulla رnullnullاa
5اnullnullnulla کnullnulla nullnullورa nullnullnullnullnulla nullnulla
nullnullnullnulla 5آnulla نآa nullnulla اداa
مارآa دnullnulla nullnulla مدa اnullnullnulla
قnullnullnullnulla nullnulla nullnullnulla nullnullاa null5ورa
nullnullآa nullnullآa nullnulla ماa ںاnullnulla
nullnullزa 5 nullnullnullnulla null5a ڈیa دلa
 
C.2 List of Sample Postfixes 
nullnullnullآnullںnulla ںnullnullاa null5nullnullaa زرnullnullاوa 5اnulla زnullnullیa
nullnullnullnulla یnullnullnullaa nullnullدa وnullnulla 5ارآnulla 5nullnullnullnulla
روnullnullnullںnulla روnullnullnullںnulla null5راa nullnulla nullnullرnulla null nullnullnulla
رادnullnullnullںnulla nullnullnullnullںnulla null5اa nullnullاوa 5وnullnullnulla nullnullاnullnullیa
ںارa زاnullnullnullںnulla null5nullnulla nullاnullnullnullnulla 5اnullnullnulla 5nullnullnulla
زnullnullnullںnulla nullnullںؤاnulla null5a زa 5ادnullnullnulla 5وnulla
nullارآnullںnulla nullnullnullnullںnulla ےa زnullnulla 5nullnullرnulla 5nullnullnullnulla
ںnullnullnullnulla ںاوa null5a زnull5آa روnullnullیa 5دnulla
nullnullnullnullںnulla nullnullnullnullnullnulla null5اa nullnullاnullnulla nullآnullnullیa 5nullnullnulla
رnullnullnullںnulla زاnullnullnullںnulla null5اوa nullnullزاa 5اnulla nullnull5nullnulla
nullnullnullںnulla nullnullnullnullnullںnulla null5a زوnullnullاaanullnullanull5nulla رادnullnullیa
ںnullnullnulla nullnullnullnullnullںnulla null5nullnulla رnullnulla 5nullnullnullnulla 5اnulla
زروnullںnulla ںوزوnullnullاaanullnull5a زnullnullآa رازآیa رnullnullیa
ںؤاnullnulla nullnullnullںnulla ےnullnulla nullnullnullnulla دnullnullیa 5nullnullnullnulla
رnullnullnullںnulla nullnullnullںnullnullaanullnullnulla زاnullnulla 5وnulla رnullnullیa
nullnullاnullnullںnulla nullnullnullnullںnulla ےوa زارa nullnullnullیa 5nullnullnulla
nullارnullںnulla nullاnullnullnullںnulla null5اa زادnullnulla nullnullآanull5nulla 5nullnullnullnulla
 
47

