Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, ACL-IJCNLP 2009, pages 92–95,
Suntec, Singapore, 6-7 August 2009. c©2009 ACL and AFNLP
Resource Report: Building Paralel Text Corpora for                                      
Multi-Domain Translation System 
 
Budiono, Hammam Riza, Chairil Hakim 
Science and Technology Network Information Center (IPTEKnet) 
Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology (BPPT), Jakarta, INDONESIA 
budi@iptek.net.id, hammam@iptek.net.id, chairil@iptek.net.id 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Paralel text is one of the most valuable 
resources for development of statistical 
machine translation systems and other 
NLP aplications. However, manual 
translations are very costly, and the 
number of known paralel text is limited. 
Hence, our research started with creating 
and colecting a large amount of paralel 
text resources for Indonesian-English. 
We describe in this paper the creation of 
paralel corpora: ANTARA News, BPT-
PANL and BTEC-ATR. In order to be 
useful, these resources must be available 
in reasonable quantities and qualities to 
be useful for statistical aproaches to 
language procesing. We describe 
problem and solution as wel robust tols 
and anotation schema to build and 
proces these corpora. 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, our research focuses in 
developing Open Source Tolkit for English-
Indonesian translation system. We ned to build 
a god quality with reasonable size of paralel 
corpus in Indonesian-English. We started by 
colecting Indonesian corpus and perform raw 
corpus cleaning, translation, alignment and 
XML taging. The alignment at sentence levels 
makes paralel corpora both more interesting 
and more useful. As long as paralel corpora 
exist, sentence aligned paralel corpora is an 
isue which is solved by sentence aligners. In 
our case, the alignment is performed manualy 
by hand while doing the actual translation. 
 The task that was caried out by us in 
gathering corpus was conducted in several 
stages. Until now, we had several colections 
from various resources. Among them is the 
colection of ANTARA News corpus, colection 
of BPT-PANL corpus and colection of BTEC-
ATR corpus. Respectively this work had 
various Domain (National News, International 
News, Busines/Economy, Politics, Science, 
Technology, and Sport) and diferent sources 
(News agency, Online Publisher, International 
institution) leading toward diferent handling 
and proces.  
 
 
2. Collection of ANTARA Corpus 
 
ANTARA is the national news agency of 
Indonesia that has a colection of news articles 
available in two languages, Bahasa Indonesia 
and English. ANTARA develop a large news 
colection for the last 10 years, for various 
domains, i.e. political news, economics news, 
international news, national news, sport news, 
science news and entertainment news. Al of 
these news articles were stored in a database 
system (Oracle) as comparable corpora and the 
structure of the database did not have the key 
pairs betwen one news article writen in 
Indonesian and the one in English news article. 
At the begining, we had a long tedious 
proces for reaching an agrement betwen the 
two sides, ANTARA and BPT.  We asked 
permision to use these data for our researches 
to develop automatic translation which in return 
wil help ANTARA’s journalist and reporters 
for translation. In adition, the resulting work 
wil benefit both ANTARA and BPT in the 
form of alignment of news articles and key pairs 
for database improvement. 
The main problem is transforming this 
comparable corpus into paralel corpus. We 
should distinguish betwen Paralel Corpora 
with Comparable Corpora. The later 
(comparable corpora) are texts in diferent 
92
languages with the same main topic. A set of 
news articles, from journals or news broadcast 
systems, as they refer the same event in 
diferent languages can be considered as 
Comparable Corpora. Consider a news item 
about the September 1 tragedy. Diferent 
newspapers, in diferent languages wil refer the 
World Trade Center, airplanes, Bin Laden and a 
lot of other specific words. This is the case of 
Comparable Corpora which can be used by 
translators who know day-to-day language but 
ned to learn how to translate a specific term. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. ANTARA Corpus Procesing 
  
The number of data’s that was used is 
betwen the period of year 200 to 207 and the 
articles were taken in stages, in SQL format, 
amounting to 250.00 sentence pairs (2.5 
Milion words). These data, afterwards was 
procesed by refering to the news title in 
respective article to become article pairs. After 
this article fiting was finished, the next step 
was to make the pairs of sentence and then the 
result was store in a new table of database. The 
work scheme of ANTARA corpus colection is 
given below in Figure 1. 
During the alignment proces, the sentences 
were reviewed manualy, by means of election 
against the quality of the translations. The 
togle cleaning stage is used for the proces of 
cleaning of the punctuation mark like [? ! “ ” 
‘ ’ : ; {}]. Afterwards, these sentences pairs was 
separated into two documents, each for 
Indonesian and English and put into SGML 
format. Atention has to be made to kep the 
consistency of translation from the comparable 
corpora into paralel corpora. 
The ANTARA corpus is used for building 
machine translation using an open source 
MOSES SMT. It can be reported here that the 
BLEU score of 0.76 can be reached by using 1 
Milion words training set. 
 
3. Collection of BPPT-PANL Corpus 
 
The creation of this corpus is divided into 3 
steps [6]. First step is the translation of 
Indonesian corpus; the second step is the 
alignment proces and resolving isues and 
folowed by taging of corpus using XML 
schema in step 3. 
 
 
Figure 2. BPT-PANL Corpus Development 
3.1 Translation
of Indonesian Corpus 
We have colected corpora in Bahasa Indonesia 
covering various domains. This corpus is 
colected from various online sources which we 
can aply Creative Comons IPR to its content 
[2].  
Translation, in our project definition, is the 
semantic and syntactic transfer from a sentence 
writen in Bahasa Indonesia to a sentence in 
English language. This definition is rigidly 
constructed, in order to preserve sentence 
alignment betwen the original text and the 
target text in English. 
If we are going to translate and align 
sentences, then obviously we must clarify what 
we understand by sentence. While most people 
have strong intuitions about what is a sentence 
Creative Comon Online 
Document “Raw Corpus” 
 
Corpus Article 
 
Sentence Corpus 
 
Translator 1 
Indonesian-English 
 
Translator 2 
Indonesian-English 
 
Translator Reviewer 
(E-I) 
 
Alignment 
XML Taging 
 
Paralel Corpus 
Indonesian English 
 
ANTARA News Agency 
(Oracle DB) 
Selection and 
transformation 
Selected DB 
(Comparable Corpora) 
Alignment 
sentences 
Pairs Corpus 
Indonesia-English 
Clean 
Corpus 
Togle 
cleaning 
Conversion 
to text 
Indonesia 
text 
English 
text 
Conversion 
to SGML 
Indonesia 
SGML 
English 
SGML 
93
and what is not, there is no universal definition 
of that notion. Before we set out on devising 
one, however, it should be noted that because 
PANL-BPT Corpus is primarily intended to be 
used as a training text for statistical machine 
translation systems, both the exact translation 
and the actual segmentation of the text that 
results from translation are crucialy important. 
Our main concern in this regard was to come 
up with some guidelines for translation that 
would be both practical for the translators and 
aligners as wel as it is useful for the end-users 
of the corpus. We started out with something 
relatively straightforward, which we then 
expanded as neded. 
Of course, given the relative vaguenes of the 
definitions of sentence and translation given 
above, it was clear that in many situations, 
arbitrary decisions would have to be made. Our 
human aligners were instructed to be as 
consistent as posible. But even then, because of 
the repetitive nature of the task, erors had to be 
expected. 
3.2 Alignment
of Paralel Texts 
A paralel text alignment describes the relations 
that exist betwen a text and its translation. 
These relations can be viewed at various levels 
of granularity: betwen text divisions, 
paragraphs, sentences, propositions, words, 
even characters. While it would certainly have 
ben interesting to produce finer-grain 
alignments, it was decided that BPT-PANL 
Corpus would record corespondences at the 
level of sentences. This decision was based on a 
number of factors. 
First, sentence-level alignments have so far 
proved very useful in a number of aplications, 
which could be characterized as high recal, low 
precision aplications, i.e. aplications where it 
is more important to have al the answers to a 
specific question than to have only the god 
ones. 
Secondly is the automatic acquisition of 
information about translation, as was proposed 
in [1] as part of a project to build a machine 
translation system entirely based on statistical 
knowledge. Such statistical models ned to be 
trained with large quantities of paralel text. 
Intuitively, the ideal training material for this 
task would be paralel text aligned at the level of 
words. Yet, because these models picture the 
translation proces in an extremely simplified 
maner, reliable statistical estimates can 
nevertheles be obtained from uch les precise 
data, such as pairs of sentences. 
For al these reasons, we decided that it 
would be more apropriate initialy to 
concentrate on sentence-level alignments. 
Furthermore, we decided to restrict ourselves to 
“non-crosing” alignments, which is a paralel 
segmentation of the two texts, into an equal 
number of segments, such that the nth segment 
in one text and the nth segment in the other text 
are translations of one another [4]. 
It was sugested that al the texts would be 
aligned twice, each time by a diferent aligner. 
The resulting alignments would then be 
compared, so as to detect any discrepancies 
betwen the two. The aligners were then asked 
to conciliate these diferences together. Because 
the entire BPT-PANL corpus was aligned by 
the same two aligners, this way of proceding 
not only minimized the number of erors; it also 
ensured that both aligners had the same 
understanding of the guidelines. 
3.3  Corpus Taging 
SGML and XML played a major part in the 
BNC project [3] which serve as an interchange 
medium betwen the various data-providers, as 
a target aplication-independent format; and as 
the vehicle for expresion of metadata and 
linguistic interpretations encoded within the 
corpus. 
From the start of the project, it was 
recognized that we have to chose a standard 
format such as TEI P4 or XML in order to 
maintain the corpus for long term storage and 
also enable distribution of the data. The 
importance of XML as an aplication 
independent encoding format is also becoming 
aparent, as a wide range of aplications for it 
begin to be realized. 
The basic structural mark up of texts may be 
sumarized as folows. Each of the documents 
or text source articles making up the corpus is 
represented by a single <corpus> element, 
containing a header <domain> and <language>, 
and folowed by sentence ID <number>. 
The header element contains detailed and 
richly structured metadata suplying a variety of 
contextual information about the document (its 
domain, source, encoding, etc., as defined by 
the Text Encoding Initiative). 
Sample taging for English as folows: 
 
94
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?> 
<corpus> 
 <national> 
  <language>english</language> 
  <id>1</id> 
  <sentence>The Indian government is 
providing scholarships to 20 Indonesian 
students anualy including for university 
graduate and post-graduate 
studies.</sentence> 
 </national> 
</corpus> 
 
 
4. Collection of BTEC-ATR Corpus 
BTEC was the abreviation from Basic Travel 
Expresion Corpus.  This corpus this was the 
everyday normal conversational spech mostly 
use in traveling and tourism. The source corpus 
was in monolingual English belonging to NICT-
ATR Japan. 
As part of A-STAR project coperation [5], 
our task was to do the manual translation from 
English to Indonesian. Similar to the method 
that was used in developing BPT-PANL 
corpus colection; we developed 153.00 
uterances into paralel corpora. Aditionaly, 
we developed POS Taging, sylabification and 
word-stres into this corpus. The main 
diference was BPT-PANL originated in 
monolingual Indonesian that was taken from the 
domain international, national, economics, sport 
and science whereas BTEC-ATR originated in 
spech of English in the travel domain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Summary 
After many atempts for having a reasonable 
size of paralel text for statistical machine 
translation experiments, we are now having a 
god quality of paralel corpus colection in 
Bahasa Indonesia and English as folows: 
 
Name Size Domain Origin Anotatio
n 
Scheme 
ANTARA 250K 
sentences 
News 
(National 
Economy) 
ANTARA 
News 
Agency 
TEI P4 
BPPT-
PANL 
50K 
words 
News 
(Busines, 
Science) 
Online 
Publisher 
TEI, XML, 
TMX 
BTEC-
ATR 
153K 
sentences 
Travel NICT-
ATR 
XML 
INC-IX 10K 
sentences 
Parliamen
t Report 
BPPT  GDA 
 
 
References 
 [1] Brown, P. F., Pietra, S. A. D., Pietra, V. J. D., 
and Mercer, R. L. (193). The Mathematics of 
Machine Translation: Parameter Estimation. 
Computational Linguistics, 19(2). 
[2] Wikipedia Creative Comons Website, 
htp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/, retrieved August 
08 
[3] Aston, G. and Burnard, L. The BNC Handbok 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Pres., 198 
[4] Simard, M. and Plamondon, P. (196). Bilingual 
Sentence Alignment: Balancing Robustnes and 
Acuracy. In Procedings of AMTA-96, 
Montréal, Canada. 
[5] Sakriani Sakti, Eka Kelana, Hamam Riza 
(BPT), Satoshi Nakamura, Large Vocabulary 
ASR for Indonesian Language in the A-STAR 
Project, 2007. 
[6] Riza, Hamam, et.al, PAN Localization Project 
Report. BPT, 2008-2009. 
 
95

