Proceedings of the 12th European Workshop on Natural Language Generation, pages 138–145,
Athens, Greece, 30 – 31 March 2009. c©2009 Association for Computational Linguistics
Generating clausal cordinate elipsis multilingualy: 
A uniform aproach based on postediting 
 
Karin Harbusch 
Computer Science Department 
University of Koblenz-Landau 
PO Box 201602, 56016 Koblenz/DE 
harbusch@uni-koblenz.de 
Gerard Kempen 
 Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics 
PO Box 310, 6500AH Nijmegen/NL 
& Cognitive Psychology Unit, Leiden University 
gerard.kempen@mpi.nl 
 
Abstract 
Present-day sentence generators are often in-
capable of producing a wide variety of wel-
formed eliptical versions of cordinated 
clauses, in particular, of combined eliptical 
phenomena (Gaping, Forward and Back-
ward Conjunction Reduction, etc.). The ap-
plicability of the various types of clausal co-
ordinate elipsis (CE) presuposes detailed 
comparisons of the syntactic properties of 
the cordinated clauses. These nonlocal 
comparisons argue against aproaches based 
on local rules that treat CE structures as 
special cases of clausal cordination. We 
advocate an alternative aproach where CE 
rules take the form of postediting rules ap-
plicable to noneliptical structures. The ad-
vantage is not only a higher level of modu-
larity but also aplicability to languages be-
longing to diferent language families. We 
describe a language-neutral module (caled 
Eleipo; implemented in JAVA) that gener-
ates as output al major CE versions of co-
ordinated clauses. Eleipo takes as input 
linearly ordered noneliptical cordinated 
clauses anotated with lexical identity and 
coreferentiality relationships betwen words 
and word groups in the conjuncts. We dem-
onstrate the feasibility of a single set of 
postediting rules that atains multilingual 
coverage. 
1 Introduction

In present-day Natural-Language Generation 
(NLG) architectures, elision rules typicaly form 
part of the Agregation component, i.e. of the 
module that decides how to group conceptual 
mesages into a sentence—a module belonging 
to the Microplaner (cf. Reiter & Dale, 200, 
for an authoritative overview of sentence and 
text generation technology). In such generators, 
the computation of cordinate structures takes 
place at a relatively early stage of syntactic 
procesing. However, many types of clausal co-
ordinate elipsis (CE) require detailed com-
parisons of the final syntactic shape of the cor-
dinated clauses (conjuncts). This is even more 
true when it is desirable to combine elision con-
structions, as in German example (1a), where 
Subgaping—a form of Gaping—combines 
with Backward Conjunction Reduction (for 
definitions and examples se Table 1). Example 
(1) also ilustrates that often more than one el-
liptical option is available: (1b) shows a variant 
with Subgaping alone. If the noneliptical sen-
tence generator would chose a diferent Verb 
order in the second conjunct (‘gestutzt werden 
solen’ as in (1d), then Subgaping would be 
the sole alternative. 
(1) a. Die Bäume  solen   gefällt  werden und 
     The  tres   should cut-down  be   and 
     die Sträucher  solen  gestutzt werden 
     the shrubs    should  pruned  be 
            'The tres should be cut down and the shrubs 
 pruned’ 
 b. Die Bäume solen gefält werden und 
          die Sträucher solen gestutzt werden 
 c. *Die Bäume solen gefällt werden und 
          gestutzt werden solen die Sträucher 
 d. Die Bäume solen gefält werden und 
          gestutzt werden solen die Sträucher 
The comparisons betwen the clausal con-
juncts mainly pertain to the linear order of their 
major constituents and to identity relations be-
twen the lexical material contained in them. 
For instance, if a right-peripheral string of lexi-
cal items in the anterior conjunct is identical to 
such a string in the posterior conjunct, then 
Backward Conjunction Reduction licenses eli-
sion of the former string. In (1a), the two one-
word strings ‘werden’ met this requirement. 
Language-typological work, e.g. the recent 
survey by Haspelmath (207), provides another 
argument for a “late” CE component. The 
main phenomena can be categorized into a smal 
number of basic types, which have ben atested 
in languages belonging to diferent language 
138
families. This sugests the posibility of a multi-
lingual aproach to CE where the main CE 
proceses are defined as procedures that are iso-
lated from the “normal” gramar rules for 
noneliptical structures, and are independent 
from each other (se Section 4). 
Instead of having an agregation component 
where the rules for noneliptical clausal cordi-
nate structures are intermingled with rules for 
eliptical variants, we consider an alternative 
aproach where the aplication of the elipsis 
rules is defered until the noneliptical structures 
have ben completed. That is, the elision options 
are calculated and executed during a postediting 
stage, after the strategic and tactic components 
of the generator have delivered the noneliptical 
versions. We claim that this modular aproach 
facilitates the development of multilingual CE 
components for diferent languages by switch-
ing on and of the individual CE procedures 
(e.g. no Gaping in Japanese). 
The structure of the paper is as folows. In 
Section 2, we introduce the four main CE phe-
nomena and informaly define their treatment in 
a procedural maner. Section 3 lays out the ba-
sic postediting rules that we implemented in 
JAVA as a language-neutral algorithm (nick-
named Eleipo, which means ‘I leave out’ in 
clasical Grek). In Section 4, we present some 
findings from language-typological studies and 
explore their implications for potential multilin-
gual aplicability of Eleipo. Finaly, in section 
5, we draw some conclusions. 
The Eleipo version described here embodies 
several important improvements to a version 
described briefly in Harbusch & Kempen 
(206), particularly with respect to Subject Gap 
in clauses with Finite/Fronted Verbs (SGF). 
Moreover, the space alowed here enables us to 
explain Eleipo’s iner workings in more detail, 
and to demonstrate its multilingual potential. 
2 Clausal
coordinate ellipsis (CCE) 
2.1 Clausal
cordinate elipsis in linguistic 
theories and in NLG: State of the art 
Treatments of the phenomena of clausal cordi-
nation and CE are provided by al major 
gramar formalisms. Some representative stud-
ies are Sarkar & Joshi (196) for Tre Adjoining 
Gramar; Stedman (200) for Combinatory 
Categorial Gramar; Bresnan (200) and Frank 
(202) for Lexical-Functional Gramar; Crys-
man (203) and Beavers & Sag (204) for 
Head-driven Phrase-Structure Gramar; and te 
Velde (205) for the Minimalist Program. Their 
treatments of CE take the form of special de-
clarative cordination rules, in contrast with the 
modular and procedural approach we propose. 
In the NLG comunity, modular treatments 
of CE—implemented as programs that take 
unreduced cordinations expresed in the sys-
tem’s gramar formalism as input and return 
eliptical versions as output—have ben elabo-
rated in several projects (Shaw, 198; Dalianis, 
199; Hielkema, 205). These systems are lim-
ited in that that they do not cover al of the four 
CE proceses and are monolingual. 
2.2  Clausal cordinate elipsis types 
In the linguistic literature on clausal cordinate 
elipsis, four main CE proceses are often dis-
tinguished, as shown in Table 1. 
In the theoretical framework by Kempen 
(209) and its implementations (Harbusch & 
Kempen (206) for German and Dutch; Har-
busch et al. (209) for Estonian), the elision 
proces is guided by identity constraints and 
linear order (cf. column 4 in Table 1). We dis-
tinguish thre basic types of identity relations 
betwen words or word groups (constituents) 
belonging to diferent conjuncts
1
: 
(1) Lema identity: two diferent words be-
long to the same inflectional paradigm; e.g. 
the Verbs ‘live’ and ‘lives’ in example (2). 
(2) Form identity: two words have the same 
speling/sound and are lema-identical; 
e.g., two tokens of ‘want’ are form-
identical if they are both Verbs, but not if 
one is a Verb and the other is a Noun. 
(3) Coreferentiality: two words/constituents 
denote the same entity or entities in the ex-
ternal context, i.e. have the same reference.
                                            
1
 Very often, lemmaand form identity coincide with 
coreference, but not necesarily. For instance, in ‘John 
bought a car in July, and Peter bought a car in August,’ 
the two tokens of ‘a car’ are not, in al likelihod, corefer-
ential. Nevertheles, elision of ‘a car’ is alowed in this 
Gaping example. In the semantic literature, this relation is 
caled slopy identity. On the other hand, in ‘Who wants 
cofe and who wants tea?,’ the two tokens of ‘who’ are 
not coreferential, and the second token canot be elided. 
We asume that the strategic and/or the tactical component 
of the generator asigns difering identity tags (se Section 
3.1) to lemaor form-identical constituents if and only if 
their reference is strictly non-identical. Also note that, in 
the folowing, the thre identity relationships wil not only 
be aplied to individual words but also to constituents en-
tirely consisting of words that met the respective criteria 
(cf. the numerical subscripts in Figure 1 in Section 3). 
139
Table 1. Clausal cordinate elipsis (CE) types. Column 2 lists the abreviations for the types mentioned in 
column 1 (se Eleipo’s algorithm in Section 3). Column 3 ilustrates the CE types. Column 4 sumarizes the 
elision conditions explained in Section 3. 
CE type Abr. Examples Elision conditions 
Gaping g (2) Ulf       lives in Leipzig and 
   his children live
g
 in Ulm 
Lema identity of Verb & 
contrastivenes of remnants 
Long-Distance 
Gaping (LDG) 
g(g)
+
 (3) My wife wants  to buy   a car and 
   my son  wants
g
 [to buy]
gg
 a motorcycle 
Gaping conditions in su-
perclause (Section 3.2.1) 
Subgaping sg (4) The driver    was   kiled and 
   the pasengers were
sg
 severely wounded 
Gaping conditions & VP 
remnant in second conjunct 
Striping str (5) My sister    lives in Narva and 
   her children [live in Narva]
str
 to 
Gaping conditions & only 
one non-Verb remnant 
Forward 
Conjunction 
Reduction 
(FCR) 
f (6) Since two years, my sister lives in Delft and 
     [since two years, my sister]
f
 works in Leiden 
(7) Tokyo is the city [S where Ota lives and 
                                      where
f
 Kusuke works] 
Form identity & 
left-peripherality (within 
clause boundaries) of 
major clausal constituents 
Backward 
Conjunction 
Reduction 
(BCR) 
b (8) John wrote one article
b
 and 
   Mary edited two articles. 
(9) Anja  arived before thre [o’clock]
b
 and 
   Maria arived
g
 after four   o’clock 
Lema identity & 
right-peripherality, 
posibly disregarding major 
constituent boundaries 
Subject Gap in 
clauses with 
Finite/Fronted 
Verbs (SGF) 
s (10) Into the wod went the hunter and 
                                      [the hunter]
s 
hot a hare 
Form-identical Subject & 
first conjunct starting with 
Verb/Modifier/Adjunct & 
FCR aplied if licensed 
 
As sumarized in column 4 of Table 1, al 
forms of Gaping (i.e. including LDG, Subgap-
ping and Striping) are characterized by elision 
of the posterior member of a paired lema-
identical Verb. The position of this Verb ned 
not be peripheral but is often medial, as in ex-
amples (2) through (5), and (9). Non-elided con-
stituents in the posterior conjunct are caled 
remnants. Al remnants should pair up with a 
constituent in the anterior conjunct that has the 
same gramatical function but is not coreferen-
tial. Stated diferently, the members of such a 
pair are contrastive—in (2): the Subjects ‘Ulf’ 
vs. ‘his children’, and the locative Modifiers ‘in 
Leipzig’ vs. ‘in Ulm.’ (Notice that although two 
tokens of ‘my’ in (3) ocupy comparable posi-
tions in the two conjuncts, it is not posible to 
elide any of them. On the other hand, ‘were’ in 
(4) can be elided from the posterior conjunct 
although it has no literal anterior counterpart.) 
In LDG, the remnants originate from diferent 
clauses (more precisely: diferent clauses that 
belong to the same superclause; term defined in 
Section 3.2.1). In (3), ‘my son’ belongs to the 
main clause but ‘a motorcycle’ to the infinitival 
complement clause. In Subgaping, the poste-
rior conjunct includes a remnant in the form of a 
nonfinite complement clause (VP; ‘severely 
wounded’ in (4). In Striping, the posterior 
conjunct is left with one non-Verb remnant, of-
ten suplemented by the Adverb ‘to.’ 
In Forward Conjunction Reduction (FCR), 
elision afects the posterior token of a pair of 
left-peripheral strings consisting of one or more 
form-identical major constituents. In (6) and (7), 
the posterior tokens of ‘since two years, my sis-
ter’ and ‘where,’ respectively, belong to such 
pairs and are eligible for FCR. 
Backward Conjunction Reduction (BCR) is 
almost the miror image of FCR as it deletes the 
anterior member of a pair of right-peripheral 
lema-identical word strings (‘o’clock’ in (9); 
however, BCR may elide part of a major con-
stituent—e.g. only the part ‘article’ of the Direct 
Object in (8) and ‘o’clock’ of the temporal 
Modifier ‘before thre o’clock’ in (9). In adi-
tion, it requires only lema identity—witnes 
examples like (8).
2
 
Subject Gap in clauses with Finite/Fronted 
Verbs (SGF) can elide the Subject of the poste-
rior conjunct when in the anterior conjunct the 
form-identical Subject folows the Verb (Sub-
ject-Verb inversion); moreover, the Head Verbs 
of the conjoined clauses—both with main or 
interogative clause word order—are diferent. 
(FCR canot have caused the absence of the 
posterior Subject since the anterior Subject is 
not left-peripheral.) The examples in (1) 
                                            
2
However, case-identity is required as wel, at least in 
German: ?Hilf [dem Patienten]
DAT 
und reanimier [den 
Patient]
ACC 
 ‘Help and reanimate the patient’. 
140
through (14) show that the first constituents of 
the unreduced clauses must met certain special 
requirements, which extend the rule proposed in 
our previous publications. In particular, these 
constituents are alowed to be non-form-
identical finite Head Verbs (1) or form-
identical Modifiers (12) but not form-identical 
arguments, e.g. Direct Objects (13) or Comple-
ments (14). Aditionaly, if FCR is licensed, as 
in (12), it should actualy be realized in order to 
alow SGF. 
 (1) Stehen die Leute noch  am  Eingang und 
   Stand  the people stil at-the entrance and 
  rufen [die Leute]
s
 Parolen? 
  shout the people slogans 
  ‘Are the people stil standing at the 
  entrance (and are they) shouting slogans?’ 
(12) Warum/Gestern  bist  du  gegangen und 
  hy/Yesterday  have you left     and 
  [warum/gestern]
f
 hast du
s
 nichts  gesagt 
  why/yesterday  have you nothing said 
 ‘Why did you leave and didn’t you tel me 
    anything?’ / ‘Yesterday you left and ..’ 
(13) *Diesen Wein trinke ich nicht mehr   und 
   This   wine  drink I   not anymore and 
   [diesen Wein]
f
 gieße ich
s
 weg 
  this    wine  throw  I  away 
  ‘I don’t drink this wine anymore and throw 
  it away’ 
(14) *Das Examen bestehen wil er und 
   The exam   pas    wil he and 
  [das Examen bestehen]
f
 kan er
s
 auch 
   the  exam  pas     can he to/as-wel 
‘He wants to pas the exam and wil be able to 
as wel’ 
3 Language-neutral CCE generation 
In this Section, we describe Eleipo’s algorithm 
in more detail than we were able to in Harbusch 
& Kempen (206), again using the German ex-
ample (15). Moreover, we elaborate on SGF, 
given the new, more detailed rules. We limit 
ourselves to ‘and’-cordinations of only n=2 
conjuncts. Actualy, Eleipo can handle n-ary 
cordinations consisting of n≥2 conjuncts by 
procesing n–1 consecutive pairs of conjuncts 
(1+2, 2+3, etc.), together with an asyndeton rule 
that replaces non-final ‘and’-s by comas. 
(15) Heute wird Hans sein Auto putzen und 
    Today wil Hans his car  clean  and 
     heute wird Susi ihr Fahrad putzen 
    today wil Susi her bike   clean 
    ‘Today, Hans wil clean his car and today, Susi              
wil clean her bike’ 
Eleipo’s functioning is based on the asump-
tion that CE does not result from the aplica-
tion of local declarative gramar rules for 
clause formation but from a procedural compo-
nent that inspects noneliptical (unreduced) sen-
tences produced by the sentence generator and 
may block the overt expresion of certain con-
stituents. Due to this feature, Eleipo can be 
combined, at least in principle, with various 
generators. However, the module neds a for-
malism-dependent interface that converts gen-
erator output to a (simple) canonical form. 
3.1  Eleipo’s input 
Eleipo takes as input noneliptical syntactic 
tres in canonical form, suplied with identity 
tags (cf. Figure 1). Every categorial node of an 
input tre is imediately dominated by a func-
tional node. Each conjunct is roted in a cate-
gorial node whose daughter nodes (imediate 
constituents) are gramatical functions (Sub-
ject, Direct Object, Head, Subordinating Con-
junction, Expr(esion), etc.). Within a conjunct, 
al major constituents are represented at the 
same hierarchical level (“flat” tres). 
Categorial nodes are adorned with numerical 
identity tags (ID-tags) which expres lema 
identity. In Figure 1, the ID “2” is atached to 
the head node of both exemplars of AP ‘heute’ 
‘today’, thus marking their lema identity. In 
contrast, the Subject NPs ‘Hans’ and ‘Susi’ 
cary diferent ID-tags, indicating that they are 
not lema-identical and canot be elided by any 
CE proces. 
3.2 The
thre stages of Eleipo 
Eleipo is caled for every cordination domain 
within a non-eliptical input clause. We define a 
cordination domain as a (sub)tre roting in a 
gramatical function node that dominates two 
or more categorial S-nodes separated by cordi-
nating conjunctions (‘and’). For any given cor-
dination domain, Eleipo’s task consists of thre 
consecutive stages: Preparation, Diagnosis, and 
ReadOut. 
3.2.1 Preparation

The first job within Preparation is the demarca-
tion of superclauses. Kempen (209) introduced 
this notion in the treatment of Gaping, in par-
ticular LDG. A superclause is either a simple 
finite or non-finite clause (roting in an S-node, 
without any subordinate clauses), or a hierarchy 
of finite or non-finite clauses where every em-
beded clause is an imediate daughter of an 
embeding clause; moreover, none of the par-
ticipating clauses begins with a subordinating
141
 
Figure 1. Non-eliptical input tre in canonical form, underlying sentence (15). Categorial nodes are printed in 
bold, functional nodes in italics. The numerical subscripted tags denote lema identity or coreference. 
conjunction, with the posible exception of the 
topmost member of the hierarchy.
3
 
Next, Eleipo inspects and compares the con-
tent of the conjoined clauses by asembling four 
lists: FUNC-PAIRS, LI-FUNC-PAIRS, 
LPERIPH and RPERIPH (se Table 2). The lists 
FUNC-PAIRS and LI-FUNC-PAIRS are crucial 
not only in calculating whether a form of Gap-
ping is aplicable but also in the determination 
of contrastivenes of Gaping remnants. We 
presupose a division of MODifier constituents 
into MOD types—locative (LMOD), temporal 
(TOD, causal (CMOD), etc.—which are re-
corded in the two lists of pairs. Gaping requires 
the set of gramatical functions, including 
MOD types, in the anterior and posterior con-
juncts to be identical. If so, and if FUNC-PAIRS 
includes at least one pair of non-coreferential 
members (carying diferent ID-tags), the Boo-
lean variable CONTRAST is set to true. In the 
example, FUNC-PAIRS(S
0, S
11
) includes two 
pairs of non-coreferential major constituents 
(the Subjects and the Complements); hence, 
CONTRAST = true. LPERIPH is crucial in 
FCR, where only complete form-identical major 
constituents may be elided. RPERIPH is used in 
BCR, which sometimes leaves incomplete con-
stituents behind, as exemplified by (8) and (9). 
                                            
3
 The “embeded” clauses refered to in the definition of 
superclause fulfil the gramatical function of Subject or 
Object Complement within the embeding clause, or they 
are adverbial clauses fulfiling the function of Modifier 
within the embeding clause. In Figure 1, the Complement 
clauses S
6
 and S
14
 are major constituents of S
0
 and S
11, 
respectively. The hierarchy spaning S
0
 and S
6
 is a super-
clause, and so is the hierarchy consisting of S
11
 and S
14
. In 
‘Hans sagte, das Susi ihr Fahrad putzen wird’ ‘Hans said 
that Susi wil clean her bike,’ the Complement clause does 
not belong to the same superclause as the main clause 
‘Hans sagte ..,’ but instead starts up its own superclause. 
Gaping and its varieties can only be aplied to two cor-
dinated superclauses. 
3.2.2 Diagnosis

For each of the four CE proceses, Eleipo in-
spects al cordination domains for elision op-
tions. This requires interpreting the lists col-
lected during the Preparation stage. Any li-
censed elision option for a word or constituent 
causes the curent value of the parameter CE-
TYPE to be aded as a tag to that word or con-
stituent (cf. the subscripts in examples (2) 
through (10). Diferent eliptical variants (cf. 
examples (1a/b) are represented by multiple 
tags and yield alternative realizations, to be 
speled out during the final ReadOut stage. If the 
Bolean variable CONTRAST is true, Gaping 
runs recursively within the curent cordination 
domain. Figure 2 shows pseudocode for Gap-
ping, with input parameters LC = left conjunct, 
RC=right conjunct, and CE-TYPE=g). In the 
example: GAPING(S
0, S
11, “g”). 
Lema identity of the Head Verbs of the 
clausal conjuncts licenses Gaping. So, the tem-
poral Adverbial Modifier and the Head Verb of 
the posterior conjunct can both be marked for 
elision: ‘Heute wird Hans sein Auto putzen und 
heute
g
 wird
g
 Susi ihr Fahrad putzen’ (steps 8 
and 9). Earlier on, in step 3 and 4, Eleipo has 
already noticed that one of the non-lema-
identical pairs—S
6
 and S
14
—consists of Com-
plement clauses belonging to the same super-
clause as the cordinated main clauses (i.e. they 
do not start up a new superclause hierarchy). In 
step 6, Eleipo is caled recursively for this co-
ordinate subdomain, with argument CE-TYPE 
set to “gg”. As the Head Verbs of these com-
plement clauses are lema-identical and the 
contrastivenes condition holds (i.e. the gram-
matical function DOBJ ocurs in both the ante-
rior and the posterior complement and the ex-
emplars are not lema-identical), the posterior 
Verb is marked for elision, yielding ‘Heute wird 
142
Table 2. Definitions of the (posibly empty) lists of paired major clause constituents calculated during Eleipo’s 
Preparation stage. Column 3 shows the content of the lists for example (15), i.e. the superclauses S
0
 and S
11
. 
List Definition Content of lists for example (15) 
FUNC-
PAIRS 
Al constituent pairs LCAT–RCAT with same gram-
matical function, dominated by an S-node pair; if 
(LCAT, RCAT) is an S-node pair, then FUNC-
PAIRS is asembled recursively for this pair as wel. 
FUNC-PAIRS(S
0,S
11
)={AP
1
–AP
1,V
3
–V
3, 
                                       NP
4
–NP
12, S
6
–S
14
} 
Due to recursive aplication: 
FUNC-PAIRS(S
6,S
14
)={NP
7
–NP
15,V
10
–V
10
} 
LI-FUNC-
PAIRS 
Lema-Identical pairs of coresponding FUNC-
PAIRS (i.e., LI-FUNC-PAIRS ⊆ FUNC-PAIRS). 
LI-FUNC-PAIRS(S
0,S
11
)={AP
1
–AP
1,V
3
–V
3
} 
LI-FUNC-PAIRS(S
6,S
14
)={V
10
–V
10
}  
LPERIPH 
 
Left-peripheral form-identical complete major con-
stituents shared by the conjuncts. 
LPERIPH(S
0,S
11
)={A
2,V
3
} 
RPERIPH 
 
Right-peripheral lema-identical lexical string 
shared by the conjuncts. 
RPERIPH(S
0,S
11
) ={V
10
} 
 
1 proc GAPING(LC, RC, CE-TYPE) { 
2  for al pairs (LCAT, RCAT) in FUNC-PAIRS(LC, RC) { 
3    if (LCAT is an S-node) & (LCAT doesn’t begin a new superclause) then {/ cal GAPING recursively/ 
4      if NOT (LCAT and RCAT are lema-identical) 
5       then {atach “g” to CCE-TYPE; /LDG/ 
6                   cal GAPING(LCAT, RCAT, CE-TYPE);} 
7       else mark RCAT for elision, with CCE-TYPE} 
8    if (LCAT and RCAT are lema-identical) & NOT(LCAT is an S-node) 
9           then mark RCAT for elision, with CCE-TYPE}} 
Figure 2. Pseudocode for the GAPING procedure 
Hans sein Auto putzen und heute
g
 wird
g
 Susi ihr 
Fahrad putzen
gg
.’ 
FCR and BCR are both executed by one proce-
dure, caled CR. In FCR mode, CR is caled with 
the value of LPERIPH as input; in BCR mode, it 
takes RPERIPH’s value as input. Recal that these 
lists were computed in the Preparation stage and 
may contain a form-identical (LPERIPH) or a 
lema-identical (RPERIPH) lexical string. In 
cals to CR (se the pseudocode in Figure 3), pa-
rameter PERIPH is set to LPERIPH or RPERIPH, 
and CCE-TYPE to “b” or “f” depending on 
whether BCR or FCR is to be executed. In our 
example, the main program cals are: 
CR(S
0, S
11, LPERIPH(S
0, S
11
), “f”), and 
CR(S
0, S
11, RPERIPH(S
0, S
11
), “b”). 
FCR and BCR are atempted after, and fuly in-
dependently from, Gaping, irespective of 
whether the later was sucesful or not. As Modi-
fier ‘heute’ and Head Verb ‘wird’ are both listed 
in LPERIPH(S
0, S
11
), both major constituents are 
marked as eligible for elision from the posterior 
conjunct (line 6 of Figure 3)—an efect which 
hapens to coincide with the efects of Gaping: 
‘Heute   wird   Hans sein Auto    putzen und 
 heute
g-f
 wird
g-f
 Susi ihr Fahrad putzen
gg
’.
 
1 proc CR(LC, RC, PERIPH, CE-TYPE) { 
2 while PERIPH <`  <u  { 
3      set (LCAT, RCAT) to PERIPH’s first element; 
4    PERIPH =PERIPH minus first element; 
5      if CCE-TYPE = “f” 
6          then mark RCAT else LCAT for elision, 
      with CE-TYPE} 
Figure 3. Pseudocode for procedure CR 
(executing FCR or BCR). 
When atempting BCR, Eleipo discovers the 
lema-identical ‘putzen’ (V
10
), and marks the an-
terior exemplar with “b”: ‘Heute wird Hans sein 
Auto putzen
b
 und heute
g-f
 wird
g-f
 Susi ihr Fahrad 
putzen
gg
’. 
Eleipo’s fourth check concerns SGF (Figure 4; 
se section 2.1 for the rules), here with negative 
result. In example (15), Subject-Verb-inversion is 
realized in the first conjunct. However, the two 
Subjects ‘Peter’ and ‘Susi’ are not coreferential. 
1 proc SGF(LC, RC) { 
2   if (Head Verb precedes SUBJ in LC) 
            & (coreferential SUBJs in LI-FUNC-PAIRS) 
           & (Head Verb or MOD in 1
st
 position in LC) 
            & (1st position in RC is ocupied by SUBJ or a 
                  major constituent already marked for FCR) 
3        then mark RC’s SUBJ for elision “s”;} 
Figure 4. Pseudocode for SGF 
143
3.2.3 ReadOut

The resulting terminal string anotated with eli-
sion marks is handed over to the ReadOut stage. 
As ReadOut asumes that al elisions are optional, 
it may deliver more than one eliptical output 
string. However, not every posible combination 
of elisions is legitimate; certain combinations 
have to be ruled out. We mention four important 
restrictions here. First, Gaping and BCR canot 
elide both tokens of a lexical item. For instance, if 
‘putzen’ in the anterior conjunct of (15) is elided 
due to BCR, then its posterior counterpart 
‘putzen,’ which could be Gaped, should re-
main—and vice-versa. Second, in LDG, if a Verb 
with n subscripts “g” is elided, then al Verbs with 
m>n subscripts “g” should be elided as wel. 
Third, in Gaping, if only one non-Head-Verb 
constituent remains (i.e. Striping), then (the lan-
guage-specific equivalent of) the Adverb ‘to’ is 
aded. Fourth, SGF requires that FCR, if licensed, 
is actualy executed. Moreover, the ReadOut stage 
performs certain types of embelishments, e.g. it 
aplies an asyndeton rule that replaces al but the 
last token of the cordinating conjunction by 
comas. 
3.4 Eleipo
evaluated for German 
A detailed evaluation of Eleipo is curently only 
available for the German version (Harbusch & 
Kempen, 207). In the TIGER corpus with 50,000 
sentences, 9 percent of the CE sentences con-
form to Eleipo’s CE rules. Nevertheles, we are 
aware that these rules do not handle SGF in con-
joined subordinate clauses where the first conjunct 
has the standard Verb-final word order but the 
second conjunct (with SGF) embodies Verb-
second order. Furthermore, Eleipo does not take 
into acount certain semantic constraints (“one-
event semantics”; Reich, in pres; se also Frank, 
202; Kempen, 209). Another insuficiency con-
cerns the rules for asyndeton, which are more 
complicated than simply converting prefinal 
‘and’-s to comas (se Borsley (205) for perti-
nent examples). 
4 Multilingual
CCE generation 
4.1   CE rules in typological studies 
The four CE proceses have ben atested in two 
Germanic languages (German and Dutch) and in a 
Fino-Ugric language (Estonian; Harbusch et al., 
209), where they acount for a wide range of 
CE phenomena. This invites the prediction that 
CE obeys the same rules in many other lan-
guages as wel. However, Haspelmath’s (207) 
survey imediately falsifies this prediction: Other 
CE proceses may be at work in other languages, 
and/or some of the above four main proceses 
may be absent. 
Japanese may provide ilustrations of both 
points. On the one hand, it is uncontroversial that 
it does not have Gaping. On the other hand, it 
may have a form of CE that stands midway be-
twen FCR and BCR. Yatabe (201) interprets 
(16) as Left Node Raising, i.e. as the miror image 
of BCR. Like FCR, it elides a left-peripheral 
string of the posterior conjunct; like BCR, the 
elided string ned not be a complete major con-
stituent. The elided Verb yonde is part of the 
prenominal Relative clause yonde agenakata 
which is a major constituent (imediate daughter) 
of the NP headed by the Noun hito. But notice that 
(16) embodies cordination of NPs rather than 
clauses. If Japanese inded exhibits partial elision 
of left-peripheral major constituents at the clausal 
level, thus violating our FCR definition, then we 
obviously ned to define an aditional CE type. 
(16) Yonde   ageta   hito   to 
    read
gerund
 give
past
  person and 
        yonde
f
   agenakata hito   ga   ita 
    read
gerund
 give
neg-past
  person NOM be
past
 
       ‘There were people who gave (him/her) the favor 
    of reading (it) (to him/her) and people who didn’t’ 
In contrast, Abe & Hoshi (197) analyze Japa-
nese example (17) in terms of Preposition Strand-
ing. As far as we can se, this structure does not 
require a special CE proces because Eleipo 
treats it as BCR, which allows partial elision of 
the P Modifier in the anterior conjunct, hence 
stranding of the Preposition. 
(17) John-ga   Bil[-nituite hanasita]
b, sosite 
    John-Nom Bil -about   talked        and  
    Mary-ga   Susan-nituite hanasita 
        ary-Nom Susan-about talked 
       ‘John talked about Bil and Mary about Susan’ 
Haspelmath (207) also discuses certain lan-
guages with Subject–Object–Verb (SOV) as basic 
word order (Turkish and Korean) which alow 
Object deletion from non-peripheral positions in 
the posterior conjunct; i.e., they license the patern 
SOV&S_V, as in ‘The-boy the-cart puled and 
the-girl the-cart pushed.’ Eleipo canot handle 
144
this CE structure: FCR and BCR require pe-
ripherality of the elided constituent; SGF only 
aplies to Subjects; and Gaping presuposes eli-
sion of the Head Verb. In order to encompas the 
problematic patern, we may ned to define a new 
CE proces. However, at least in Turkish 
SOV&S_V cases, the elision may be due to prag-
matic factors. Göksel & Kerslake (205) show 
that major clause constituents fulfiling diverse 
gramatical functions can be elided as long their 
referents are recoverable on the basis of the ac-
companying linguistic or nonlinguistic context. 
Because the anterior conjunct may provide such a 
context, one first neds to rule out contextual re-
coverability as the licensing factor. 
At the same time, Haspelmath also shows that 
Eleipo’s four CE proceses cover a high propor-
tion of CE paterns ocuring cros-linguisti-
caly. (However, he does not discus SGF.) A 
typical ilustration is the set of nine “more widely 
atested paterns” of CE that he enumerates with 
respect to elision of Objects or Verbs in four lan-
guage groups with diferent basic word orders of 
S, O and V (Table 2 in Haspelmath, 207). Al 
these paterns are covered by our four CE proc-
eses, except SOV&S_V. 
5 Discussion

We conclude that a software module embodying 
Eleipo’s four main CE proceses—maybe with 
relatively minor adjustments—wil be able to gen-
erate a great deal of CE structures for many dif-
ferent languages. 
As for posible practical aplications, Eleipo’s 
status as a postprocesor working on input specifi-
cations of unreduced syntactic structures facili-
tates combinability with sentence generators based 
on various gramar formalisms. Even template-
based mesage generators, such as used in car 
navigation and weather forecast systems, can at-
tain higher levels of fluency and concisenes if the 
templates are anotated with syntactic structure 
and ID-tags. 
References  
Abe, J. & Hoshi, H. 197. Gaping and P-Stranding. 
Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 6.  
Beavers, J. & Sag, I.A. 204. Cordinate Elipsis and 
Aparent Non-Constituent Cordination Procs. of 
11
th
 Int. Conf. on HPSG, Louvain. 
Borsley, R.D. 205. Against ConjP. Lingua, 15. 
Bresnan, J.W. 200. Lexical-Functional Syntax. 
Blackwel, Oxford, UK. 
Crysman, B. 203. An asymetric theory of periph-
eral sharing in HPSG: Conjunction reduction and 
cordination of unlikes. Procs. of 8
th
 Conf. on For-
mal Gramar, Viena. 
Dalianis, H. 199. Agregation in natural language 
generation. Computational Inteligence, 15. 
Göksel, A. & Kerslake, C. 205. Turkish: A compre-
hensive Gramar. Routledge, Abington, Oxon, UK. 
Frank, A. 202. A (discourse) functional analysis of 
asymetric cordination. Procs. of LFG02 Conf., 
Athens. 
Harbusch, K. & Kempen, G. 206. Eleipo: A module 
that computes cordinative elipsis for language 
generators that don’t. Procs. of 1
th
 EACL, Trento. 
Harbusch, K. & Kempen, G. 207. Clausal cordinate 
elipsis in German. Procs. of 16
th
 NODALIDA, Tartu. 
Harbusch, K., Koit, M. & Õim, H. 209. A comparison 
of clausal cordinate elipsis in Estonian and Ger-
man. Procs. of 12
th
 EACL, Athens. 
Hielkema, F. 205. Performing syntactic agregation 
using discourse structures. Unpublished Master’s 
thesis, AI Unit, University of Groningen. 
Haspelmath, M. 207. Cordination. In: Shopen, T. 
(Ed.), Language typology and linguistic description. 
Cambridge University Pres [2
nd
 Ed.], Cambidge 
UK. 
Kempen, G. 209. Clausal cordination and cordinate 
elipsis in a model of the speaker. Linguistics, 
47(3). 
Reich, I. In pres. From discourse to “od cordina-
tions”—On Asymetric Cordination and Subject 
Gaps in German. In: Fabricius-Hansen, C. & Ram, 
W. (Eds.), ‘Subordination’ vs. ‘Cordination’ in 
Sentence and Text. Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Reiter, E. & Dale, R. 200. Building natural language 
generation systems. Cambridge University Pres, 
Cambridge, UK. 
Sarkar, A. & Joshi, A. 196. Cordination in Tre Ad-
joining Gramars. Procs. of 16
th 
COLING, Copen-
hagen. 
Shaw, S. 198. Segregatory cordination and elipsis in 
text generation. Procs. of 17
th 
COLING, Montreal. 
Stedman, M. 200. The syntactic proces. MIT Pres, 
Cambridge A. 
te Velde, J.R. 206. Deriving Cordinate Symetries. 
Benjamins, Amsterdam. 
Yatabe, S. 201. The syntax and semantics of left-node 
raising in Japanese. Procs. of the 7
th
 Int. HPSG 
Conf., Berkeley. CSLI Publications, Stanford CA.
145

