Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 46–49,
Uppsala, July 2010.
Importanceof negationsand experimentalqualifiersin biomedical
literature
MartinKrallinger
Struct. Biol. and Biocomp.Prog.
SpanishNationalCancerCenter, Madrid,Spain.
mkrallinger@cnio.es
Abstract
A general characteristicof most biomed-
ical disciplines is their primarily experi-
mentalcharacter. Discoveriesare obtained
through molecularbiology and biochemi-
cal techniquesthat allow understandingof
biologicalprocessesat the molecularlevel.
To qualifybiologicalevents, it is of practi-
cal significanceto detect specific types of
negationsthat can implyeitherthat a given
event is not observed under specific con-
ditions or even the opposite, that a given
event is true by altering the bio-entities
studied (e.g. introducingspecific modifi-
cationslike mutations).Of specialinterest
is also to determineif a detectedassertion
is linked to experimentalsupportprovided
by the authors. Findingexperimentalqual-
ifier cues and detectingexperimentaltech-
nique mentions is of great interest to the
biologicalcommunityin general and par-
ticularlyfor annotationdatabases.A short
overview of different types of negations
and biologicalqualifiers of practical rele-
vance will be provided.
1 BiologicalAnnotations
In line with the rapid accumulation of biological
literature and the growing number of large-scale
experimentsin biomedicine,it is becomingmore
important to capture essential facts contained in
the literatureand storing them in form of biolog-
ical annotations. Such annotations usually con-
sist in structureddatabaserecords,where biologi-
cal entitiesof relevance, like genes or proteinsare
associatedto controlledvocabularies that are use-
ful to describe the most relevant aspects of these
entities (their function, localization,processes or
pathways they participatein or implicationsin dis-
eases). Also specific types of relations between
bio-entities (e.g. physical or regulatory interac-
tions) are manually extracted from the literature.
For biologicalinterpretationand to determinethe
reliability of annotations it is crucial to capture
both negative annotations, whether a given rela-
tion has been studiedexperimentallyand does not
occur, as well as to determine the experimental
methodusedto studythe bio-entityof interest. For
instance,the value of in vitro generatedresults,or
those obtained by large-scale experimentshave a
differentsignificancecomparedto thosegenerated
in vivo. The most relevant biologicalannotations
contained in databases and constructedmanually
by expertcuratorsare linked to experimentalqual-
ifiers. Suchexperimentalqualifierscanrangefrom
simplemethodtermsto moresophisticatedontolo-
gies or hierarchicalterminologies. Experimental
qualifiers used to annotate biological entities are
for instanceprovidedby the ProteomicsStandards
Initiative Molecular Interaction (PSI-MI) ontol-
ogy, (OrchardS, Kerrien S., 2010) the Evidence
Codesof Gene Ontology(GO) (RogersMF, Ben-
Hur A, 2010) or the Open REGulatoryANNOta-
tion (ORegAnno)databaseEvidenceTypes.
2 Importanceof
Negationsin
Biomedicine
There is an increasing interest to extract from
the literature negative associations. For instance,
one of the most popular biologicalannotationef-
forts,GeneOntologyAnnotation(GOA),alsosup-
ports the annotationof primeNOTprime relations(associa-
tion.is not) to be able to represent these types of
relationsin their annotationdata. In GO, such re-
lations are labeled using primeNOTprime in the qualifier
column for a particularannotation. This negation
qualifieris appliedto provide an explicit note that
the bio-entity is not associated with a given GO
term. This is important when a GO term might
otherwisebe expectedto apply to a bio-entity, but
an experiment proves otherwise. Negative asso-
46
ciations are also used when a cited reference ex-
plicitly states a negation event, e.g. in the form
of: bio-entityX is not found in the location Y. In
addition to annotationefforts there are a range of
scenarios where extraction of negative events are
of practicalimportance,these are describedin the
following subsections.
2.1 Negationsand
Negative Controls
A common setting in experimentalbiology is to
use controls to avoid alternative explanations of
results and to minimize experimental artifacts.
Negative controlscorroboratethat the experimen-
tal outcomeis not due to somesort of unrelatedef-
fect; it serves to minimize false positives and can
serve as a backgroundobservation. The underly-
ing assumptionof negative controlsis that one as-
sumes in advance that the result should be nega-
tive, i.e. no significanteffect should be obtained.
Suchnegative controlsare mainlyexpressed in the
literatureusing negations. For instancein case of
protein-proteininteractionexperiments,a negative
control could be to demonstrate that a signal is
only obtainedwhenthe two interactorproteinsare
present,and not whenthe label (tag-protein)alone
is given to each interactor individually. To illus-
trate this aspect consider the example sentences
provided below:
• Our resultsshow that, when AGG1 is present
in the matrix,it showsa strong abilityto bind
35S-labeledAGB1,whereas GST aloneis not
able to bind any detectableAGB1.
• GST alone did not interact with FKHR even
in the presence of E2 (Fig. 2B, lane 5), in-
dicating the specific interaction between ER
and FKHR.
• 35S-labeled in vitrotranslated FBXO11
bound to immobilizedGST-p53 (lane 3) but
not GST alone (lane 2).
• PKC bound to GST-RINCK1(lane 2) but not
to GST alone (lane 1), revealing that PKC
binds to RINCKdirectly.
In thoseexamplecases,GST(alone)wouldrep-
resentthe negative control. Onlyin presenceof the
interactorproteinsa signal should be observed, if
GSTaloneis presentthe assumptionis that no sig-
nal shouldbe obtained. Negative controlsare cru-
cial for interpretationof the actual experimental
outcome.
2.2 Negative
associationsin medicaland
populationgenetics
A considerableeffortis beingmadeto detectgenes
and mutations in genes that have implicationsin
the susceptibilityof complex disorders. Naturally
occurringvariations in the sequenceof genes, of-
ten called polymorphismsmight have a deleteri-
ous, protective or no associationsat all to a patho-
logic condition. Not only to capture deleterious
and protective mutations,but alsothosethat do not
have any effect is importantto aid in the interpre-
tation of mutations observed in patients. This is
especiallytrue taking into account the increasing
use of molecularscreeningtechnologiesand per-
sonalizedmedicinein the clinicaldomain. Exam-
ple cases of negative associationsbetween genes
and mutationsto disease conditionsderived from
PubMedabstractscan be seen below:
• CC16 gene may be not a susceptibilitygene
of asthmatic patients of Han population in
southwestChina.
• The FZD3 gene might not play a role in con-
ferring susceptibility to major psychosis in
our sample.
• Apolipoprotein E gene polymorphismis not
a strong risk factor for diabetic nephropa-
thy and retinopathyin Type I diabetes: case-
control study.
• In view of this evidence, it is likely that the
SIGMAR1gene doesnot confersusceptibility
to schizophrenia.
• Thus, this SNP in the PGIS gene is not asso-
ciatedwith EH.
• The gene encoding GABBR1 is not associ-
ated with childhood absence epilepsy in the
ChineseHan population.
• We did not find an association betweenOCD,
family history for OCD, and the COMTgene
polymorphism.
Such negative associations can be useful for
the interpretationof relevance of genes for certain
conditions, enabling filtering un-relevant genes
and improving target selection for more detailed
molecularexaminations.
47
2.3 Toxicologyand
negations
A simplified view of toxicology experiments is
to distinguish,given the administrationof differ-
ent amountsof a specific compoundor drug (e.g.
low, medium and high dosage) during predefined
time spans, between toxic and non-toxic effects.
Such effects can be examined in animal models
like rats or mini-pigs by examining a series of
aspects, such as hematologicalparameters,organ
histologicalproperties(tissue alterations and size
of organs), biochemicalparameters,and changes
in food/water consumptionor fertility. Usuallyan-
imals to which specificamountsof the compound
has been administered are compared to control
cases. Here it is importantto determinealso three
kinds of negative associations: (1) under which
conditionsa given parameteror tissuehas not been
negatively affected (save dosage, non-toxic), (2)
which compounddid not show the desired bene-
ficial effect (e.g. was not effective in treating the
pathologiccondition)and (3) under whichadmin-
istrationconditionsa compoundwas not save. Ex-
amplesentencesillustratingthese negative associ-
ationsare:
• Morphological evaluationshowed that 1-BP
did not causemorphologicalchanges in sem-
iniferous epithelium, but 2-BP treatment re-
sulted in the disappearance of spermatogo-
nia, atrophy of the seminiferous tubules and
degeneration of germ cells..
• Thisis an indicationthat the extracts may not
be completelysafe in male rats when contin-
uouslyadministered for 14days.
• Histopathologic analysis of the vital organs
revealed no significant lesions in the brain,
liver, kidney, heart, spleen,ovary, and testis.
• The extract did not produce any significant
(P>0.05) changes in the mean concentra-
tions of urea, creatinine, Na+, K+, and Cl-
ions of rats in the extract treatedgroupscom-
pared to that of control.
2.4 Experimentallyaltered
bio-entitiesand
negations
In order to characterize certainbiologicalassocia-
tions,it is a commonpracticeto alterthe bio-entity
of interest, with the assumption that a given ob-
servation should change upon alteration. This is
the case of mutations or deletionsexperimentally
introducedto gene or protein sequences,with the
underlying assumption that the mutated or trun-
cated protein/geneshould loose it ability to bind
or regulate another bio-entity, or even be non-
functional.Such mutationsare usefulto pin down
the actual biologicallyrelevant functionalparts of
bio-entities,whichare usuallyof great therapeutic
importance (as target sites to inhibit certain bio-
entitiesor interactions).Such cases can be seen in
the examplesentencesprovided below:
• Accordingly, this p73 N-terminal deletion
was unableto activatetranscriptionor to in-
duce apoptosis.
• The G62Dmutantdid not bind AMP at all.
• The resulting mutant SOS3 protein was not
able to interact with the SOS2 protein kinase
and was less capableof activatingit.
• MYB4 did not localize to the nucleus in the
sad2 mutant, suggesting that SAD2 is re-
quired for MYB4nucleartrafficking.
In theseexamplecases,alteredbio-entitiesdid not
display the biological function of their wild type
(unaltered)counterparts.
3 Experimentalqualifiers
Biological annotation efforts are primarily con-
cerned about experimentally confirmed events.
Despitethe importanceof experimentalqualifiers,
only limited effort has been made to construct
comprehensive resourcesto retrieve assertionsthat
have experimentalsupportand to constructuseful
lexical resourcesand thesauriof experimentalevi-
dence techniques.To detect novel proteininterac-
tions that have been experimentallycharacterized
in the biomedical literature was one of the tasks
posed in the BioCreative challenge,a community
effort to assess text-miningtoolsdevelopedfor the
biomedical domain (Krallinger M, et al, 2008).
Also some systems to detect technicalterm men-
tions have been developed such as Termine. A
range of recurrent cues relevant for experimental
qualifiers can be observed in the literature, some
of the most relevant ones are summarizedin the
table 1.
Usingsuchexperimentalevidencecuestogether
with linguistic patterns and NLP techniques it is
feasible to determine whether a given event de-
scribed in the literature has some sort of experi-
48
Cue Pattern PMID
reveal METHODrevealed that EVENT 12506203
show METHODshowed that EVENT 17189287
demonstrate METHODdemonstratedthat EVENT 18466309
study EVENTwas studiedby METHOD 15147239
identify EVENTidentifiedin METHOD 10905349
prove EVENTproved by METHOD 16354655
analyze EVENTanalyzedby METHOD 9477575
determine EVENTdeterminedby METHOD 12006647
confirm EVENTconfirmedusing METHOD 10788494
obtain EVENTobtainedby METHOD 16582012
support EVENTsupportedby METHOD 18156215
corroborate EVENTcorroboratedusing METHOD 15757661
validate EVENTvalidatedby METHOD 17287294
verify EVENTverifiedby METHOD 18296724
detect EVENTdetectedwith METHOD 14581623
discover EVENTdiscovered by METHOD 11251078
observe EVENTobserved using METHOD 16778013
test EVENTwas tested using METHOD 14646219
Table 1: Experimentalevidencecue terms.
mentalqualifier associatedto it. The simplestpat-
terns of this sort would be for instance:
• METHODcue (a|that|novel|the|this)
• METHODcue that
• as cue by METHOD
• was cue by METHOD
• cue (in|by|here by|using|via|with) METHOD
Applying such patterns can be useful to con-
struct automatically an experimental technique
dictionary that can be handcrafted to enrich ex-
isting evidentialqualifierresources. Nevertheless,
linking automaticallyextracted experiment terms
to controlled vocabularies used for annotation in
biology is still a challengingtask that need more
manuallylabeledtextual data. Someexamplesen-
tences illustratingthe usefulness of experimental
evidencecues can be seen below:
• Gel-shiftand co-immunoprecipitationassays
haverevealedthatGT-1 caninteract withand
stabilizethe TFIIA-TBP-TATA complex.
• By yeast two-hybridassays, we demonstrate
an interactionof APC2withtwootherAPC/C
subunits.
• The specificity of interaction of VIRP1 with
viroid RNA was studied by different method-
ologies, which included Northwestern blot-
ting, plaquelift, and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays.
• A complex containing Mus81p and Rad54p
was identifiedin immunoprecipitationexper-
iments.
• In addition,we proved by affinity chromatog-
raphy that NaTrxh specificallyinteracts with
S-RNase.
Acknowledgments
I wouldlike to thankYasminAlam-Farugue(GOA
team at EBI) for useful informationon the anno-
tation of negative associations in GOA and Roser
Morante for important feedback and suggestions
on this topic.
References
MF. Rogers and A. Ben-Hur. 2010. The use of gene
ontologyevidencecodes in preventing classifieras-
sessmentbias., Bioinformatics, 25(9):1173-1177.
M. Krallingerand F. LeitnerandC. Rodriguez-Penagos
and A. Valencia 2008. Overview of the protein-
protein interaction annotation extraction task of
BioCreative II., GenomeBiol., Suppl 2:S1.
S. Orchard and S. Kerrien 2010. Molecular interac-
tions and data standardisation., MethodsMol Biol.,
604:309-318
49

