Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 53–60,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Characteristics and Analysis of Finnish and Swedish  
Clinical Intensive Care Nursing Naratives 
 
 
Helen Alvin
f, Elin Carlson
f, Hercules Dalianis
f, Ritta Danielson-Ojala
a, 
Vidas Daudaravičius
b, Martin Hassel
f, Dimitrios Kokkinakis
c, Heljä Lund-
gren-Laine
a, Gunar Nilson
f, Øystein Nytrø
d, Sanna Salanterä
a, Maria 
Skepstedt
f, Hanna Suominen
e, Sumithra Velupilai
f
 
a
Department of Nursing Science, University of Turku, VSSHP, Turku, Finland, 
b
Vytautas Magnus University, Lithuania, 
c
Department of Swedish, University of Gothenburg, Sweden, 
d
IDI, The Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway, 
e
NICTA Canbera Research Laboratory and Australian National University, Australia 
f
Department of Computer and Systems Sciences/Stockholm University 
Forum 10 
SE-164 40 Kista, Sweden 
http://www.dsv.su.se/hexanord 
Abstract 
We present a comparative study of Finish 
and Swedish free-text nursing naratives from 
intensive care. Although the two languages 
are linguistically very disimilar, our hypothe-
sis is that there are similarities that are impor-
tant and interesting from a language 
technology point of view. This may have im-
plications when building tools to support pro-
ducing and using health care documentation. 
We perform a comparative qualitative analysis 
based on structure and content, as wel as a 
comparative quantitative analysis on Finish 
and Swedish Intensive Care Unit (ICU) nurs-
ing naratives. Our findings are that ICU nurs-
ing naratives in Finland and Swedn have 
many properties in common, but that many of 
these are challenging when it comes to devel-
oping language technology tools. 
1 Introduction

The purpose of this study
1
 is to do content and 
lexical analysis of nursing narratives writen in an 
                                                             
1
 Our research on the Stockholm EPR Corpus (Dalianis et al., 
2009) has been approved by Etikprövningsnämnden i Stock-
holm, (the Regional Veting Board), reference number 
Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The ultimate goal of 
our research is to define linguistic similarities and 
language-specific aspects that differentiate clinical 
naratives in Finish and Swedish in order to lay 
groundwork for developing internationaly appli-
cable language technology solutions and create a 
framework for characterising and comparing clini-
cal narratives. Fre text is handy for information 
entry but a challenge for information extraction, 
care handover and other uses of gathered informa-
tion. Language technology can aleviate some of 
these problems in retrospective analysis by ofer-
ing a more semantically informed interpretation 
and abstraction. However, the most promising po-
tential of language technology is to interactively 
improve, interpret and code during text entry so 
that the resulting structured, coded, free text can be 
validated imediately. The critcal botleneck to-
day is namely information handover and reuse, and 
extensive text is simply not used nor is useful. In-
teractively validated, semanticaly procesed text 
could be more usable and suport abstraction, 
visualization and query tols for the benefit of cli-
nicians, patients, researchers and quality adminis-
trators.  
                                                                                                
2009/1742-31/5. Our research on the Finnish Corpus (Salan-
terä et al., 209) has ben approved by the Ethical comitee 
of the Hospital District of South West Finland, reference 
number 2/2009, §66. 
53
In this paper, we analyze Finish and Swedish 
ICU nursing naratives from both qualitative and 
quantitative perspectives. Our data includes textual 
nursing documentation of adult patients with a 
protracted inpatient period. We have chosen ICUs 
because of their international similarity in decision 
making (Lauri & Salanterä 202) an nursig 
documentation because it covers the entire inpa-
tient period. 
2 Background

2.1 Clinical
text 
Clinical text covers the text documents produced 
for clinical work by clinicians and ocurs in clini-
cal information systems. It is writen by clinicians, 
that is, profesionals (physicians, nurses, therapists 
and other specialist) responsible for patient care. 
Its primary purpose is to serve patient care as a 
sumary or hand-over note. However, clinical text 
is also writen for legal requirements, care continu-
ity and purposes of reimbursement, management 
and research. Clinical text covers every care phase 
and, depending on the purpose, documents difer. 
Documents that describe the patient’s state, current 
health problems and socio-medical history are very 
diferent from those describing a care plan, its ac-
tualization and evaluation of care outcomes. Again, 
these differ from diagnostic notes, lab results, ra-
diography readings, patholgy rports and dis-
charge documents that plan further care at 
discharge.  Finaly, clinical text may have been 
entered in “real time”, in retrospect, or as a sum-
mary, by the bedside or elsewhere. The enterer can 
be a clinician, secretary who transcribes a dictate, 
spech recognition software or another system that 
generates or synthesizes text, (McDonald 197, 
Thorodsen et al., 209.). 
2.2 Legal
requirements for clinical documen-
tation in different countries 
In several countries clinical documentation is 
based on law. In Finland, the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Health (Statutes of Finland, 298/209) 
defines that to ensure good care, al necesary and 
wide-ranging information has to be registered in 
patient records. In Sweden, the National Board of 
Health and Welfare has a similar aproach (Pa-
tientdatalagen 208:35). Clinical text should be 
explicit and intelligible, and only generally well-
known, acepted concepts and abbreviations are 
allowed to be used. It should detail adequately the 
patient’s conditions, care and recovery.  
2.3 Special
features of ICU and nursing 
An ICU is an esential component of most large 
hospitals with high quality care.  ICUs provide 
care for critically il patients and focus on condi-
tions that are life-threatening and require compre-
hensive care and constant monitoring (Webster's 
2010). This task is fairly similar universaly. It is 
based on optional, international guidelines focus-
ing on triage, admission, discharge and education. 
This international similarity was evident when 
nurses’ decision making was studied in Canada, 
Finland, Northern Ireland, Switzerland, Norway 
and the USA (Lauri & Salanterä 202); the study 
showed that decision making of ICU nurses was 
the most uniform in different countries when com-
pared with nurses working in public health care, 
psychiatric care, and short and long term care. 
Clinical text writen by nurses, that is, nursing 
narratives, both in Finland and in Sweden is based 
on the care proces which stands for gathering in-
formation from the patient, setting goals for care, 
implementing nursing interventions, and evaluat-
ing the results of given care. In Finland, the na-
tional standardized documentation model has been 
implemented with the Finnish care clasification 
(assessment, interventions and outcomes of care) 
(Tantu & Ikonen 2007). The Swedish VIPS model 
provides a structure for the documentation proces 
with key words that reflect the nursing proces 
(Ehrenberg et al., 196). 
ICU nursing narratives can be lengthy, espe-
cially when the patient stay in the ICU is pro-
longed. As much as 60 A4 pages equivalents of 
writen text may be gathered during one period of 
care. However, clinicians have somewhat different 
opinion on how to organize the information they 
write. For example, headings are often inconsistent 
and text under headings can cover a lot of other 
issues than those directly concerning the given 
heading. (Suominen et al., 209.) 
2.4 Related
studies 
Since most of the available clinical documents are 
in fre-text form, a number of stylistically oriented 
efforts to characterize the data from various angles 
54
have taken place. This may include various topics, 
from viewing detailed information about specifc 
items (e.g. readability, Kim et al., 207) to identi-
fying patterns and structures in order to provide 
beter technology to automaticaly proces the 
sublanguage (Pakhomov et al., 206). The majority 
of such eforts investigate diferent aspects of lin-
guistic features at a monolingual level, for in-
stance, Hahn & Wermter (204); Tomanek et al., 
(207); Chung (209); Harkema et al., (209); 
while for a thorough review of various related is-
sues see Meystre et al., (208). In the Nordic con-
text, Josefson (199) discuses Swedish clinical 
language and shows examples on how verb con-
structions in a clinical seting difer from a non 
clinical setting.  One claim is that the physician 
unmarks the verb forms for agentivity when writ-
ing about the patient and what actions she takes, 
for example, Patienten halucinerar [The patient 
hallucinates] instead of the normal form Patienten 
får hallucinationer [The patient experiences halu-
cinations].  
Helesø (205) describes nurses' general use of 
the language function in the nursing discharge 
notes. She finds that the text in the nursing dis-
charge notes is information-dense and character-
ized by technical terms, and that the use of 
standardised templates helped nurses improve the 
completeness, structure and content of the informa-
tion. Comparisons at a monolingual level betwen 
writen clinical text and lay text has ben caried 
out by Dalianis et al., (2009). A contrastive com-
putational linguistics study was caried out be-
twen the Stockholm EPR Corpus (SEPR) and a 
general language corpus, both writen Swedish 
text. The findings showed that SEPR contained 
longer words and that the vocabulary was highly 
domain-specific. Other work is decribed in
Ownby, (205). Comparing clinical text at a 
croslingual level has, to our knowledge, only been 
done by Borin et al., (2007).  
3 Analysis
of Finish and Swedish ICU 
nursing narratives  
The analyzed nursing naratives origin from one 
ICU in a university-affiliated hospital both in Fin-
land and Sweden. Our inclusion criterion was an 
ICU inpatient period of at least 5 days and patient's 
age of at least 16 years. The Finish data includes 
nursing naratives from 514 patient records (496 
unique patients, 18 rebounds, a patient record is 
defined as each inpatient period of at least 5 days 
per patient) betwen January 2005 and August 
2006. The Swedish data includes nursing nara-
tives from 379 patient records (33 unique pa-
tients, 46 rebounds) betwen January 206 and 
May 208. Since we did not have complete admis-
sion and discharge documents from both countries, 
our analysis is performed on daily nursing nara-
tives. These documents are written by ICU nurses 
during the actual inpatient period from the patient 
admision to the discharge.  
3.1 Qualitative
analysis 
A manual content analysis was performed by four 
health care profesionals (i.e., thre native Finnish 
speakers knowing Swedish, one Swedish native 
speaker) and one native Swedish speaking lan-
guage consultant. Thre average-sized patient re-
cords each from Finland and Sweden were chosen 
for our analysis (average size 2,389 words for Fin-
land and 5,169 words for Sweden). In the analysis, 
we considered special features (Table 1) of daily 
notes both from the structural and content related 
points of view.  
The style and context of both Finish and Swed-
ish text is very similar. For health care profesion-
als, and especialy with an ICU background, al the 
texts are intelligible and the meaning of a writer 
becomes evident from the context even in the pres-
ence of numerous linguistic and grammatical mis-
takes; almost all the sentences are lacking both 
gramatical subjects and objects. It is evident that 
in both countries, the naratives are written from a 
profesional to a profesional in order to suport 
information transfer, remind about important facts, 
and suplement numerical data. 
A feature comon for al the six records is that 
they rarely contain any subjects or objects when 
nurses are writing about patients. However, in the 
Swedish nursing naratives the word patient is 
used as a subject or object much more often than in 
the Finnish naratives. The abreviation pat. is 
mostly used for this reference and she/he is never 
used for this purpose. In the whole data, pat. is 40 
percent more comon than she/he, which is the 
most common personal pronoun. It sems that the 
word patient or pat. is used more when the profes-
sionals are writing about relatives. In general, pro-
nouns are used infrequently in the naratives, and  
55
  
Table 1. Special structural and contextual features of Finish and Swedish daily ICU nursing naratives. The original 
examples are added in (). 
 
I very rarely. If the reader is not a health care pro-
fesional, a risk for confusing the subject (i.e., the 
patient or nurse) arises. However, the context 
makes it almost always clear who is refered to. 
Approximately half of the naratives do not contain 
any verb. The most comon tense is perfect, but 
without the auxiliary has. When the meaning does 
not contain a subject it becomes “unatural” to use 
has. Instead, the supine form is used, for example 
slept, lain, and eaten. Both present and past parti
ciples without be-verb are common, for example, 
Breathing: Ventilator parameters unchanged. 
Special features of Finnish naratives 
 
Special features of Swedish naratives 
 
Structure Examples Structure Examples 
Headings are used in 2 out of 3 
patient records. Headings are typi-
cally used as subjects or subjects 
are partially used.  
Diuresis: ocasionaly profuse. 
(Diuresi: ajoitain runsasta.) 
 
Pupils move under eyelids but 
does not open eyes. 
(Pupilit likuvat luomien ala, 
muta ei ava silmiään.) 
Headings are used in al daily nara-
tives. In Swedish daily naratives, the 
structure of headings seems to be 
obligatory. The headings are used 
typically as subjects.  
Circulation: Stable with ino-
trop. 
(Cirkulation: Stabil med ino-
tropi.) 
 
Reacts only for pain stimula-
tion during the suction of intu-
bation tube. 
(Reagerar enbart vid smärt-
stimuli vid sugning i tuben.) 
Present and past participles are 
typical but verbs of be, is and are 
are not used.  
Consciousnes remained un-
changed. 
(Tajunta pysynyt enallaan.) 
 
Blod presure low. 
(Verenpaine matala.) 
Present and past participles are typical 
but verbs of be, is and are are not 
used. 
Breathing: Ventilator parame-
ters unchanged. 
(Andning: Ventilator paramet-
rarna oförändrade.) 
Complete sentences are rarely 
used. 
No spontaneous movements, 
rigidifies. 
(Ei spontania liketä, jäykiste-
lee.) 
 
Husband and daughter have 
been staying a long time beside 
the patient. 
(Mies ja tytär olet pitkän 
potilaan vierelä.) 
Complete sentences are rarely used.  
Light sedation, loks up now 
and then. 
(Lät sederad, titar up ibl-
and.) 
 
She took the wedding ring and 
the watch home. 
(Hon tog med sig vigselring 
och klocka hem.) 
Mispelings are found but the 
content or meaning is stil clear.  
Hemodynamic – hemodynamic 
(Hemodynamika – henody-
namika) 
Mispelings are found but the content 
or meaning is stil clear.  
The mother is informed. 
(Mamman är informered.) 
 
Magnesium is added. 
(Magnesium har tillsats.) 
Content Examples Content Examples 
The word patient as a subject or 
object is infrequently mentioned. If 
this word is mentioned it is not 
abbreviated.  
Oxidates wel or ventilates wel. 
(Hapeutu hyvin tai ventiloitu 
hyvin.) 
The word patient is used more often 
than in Finnish naratives as a subject 
or object. It is also replaced with 
abbreviations of Pat or Pt. 
Patient got a percutanous 
tracheostomy today. 
(Patienten har fåt en perkutan 
trakeostomi idag.) 
 
Very woried about patient’s 
condition. 
(Mycket oroliga över patien-
tens tillstånd.) 
 
Pt. wakes up for talking and 
appears to be adequate. 
(Pt. vakner på tilltal och up-
plevs som adekvat.) 
Signs are typicaly used: e.g., >, <, 
-->, +, -. 
The height for the drain raised 
from 10 --> 20 mHg. 
(Drenerausraja nostetu 10 
 --> 20 mHg.) 
 
Got medicine --> god response. 
(Sai läketä -->hyvä vaste.) 
Many diferent abreviations are 
used. The origin of entire word is 
Swedish, English, Latin, professional 
or ICU typical.  
em. [eftermidag, afternoon], 
HR [heart rate], VF [Ven-
tricula/Fibrillation, Ventricular 
Fibrilation] 
56
The use of headings is frequent and god – most of 
the time the content matches the headings (Tables 
1 and 3). In addition, headings are used similarly in 
the Swedish and Finnish documents. Most of the 
time the headings are considered as subjects of the 
sentence, for example, Consciousnes: Unchanged. 
Liquor brighter than yesterday. 
However, in the use of headings there are two 
interesting findings: If the headings are to be cho-
sen frely, as in the Finish naratives, nurses tend 
to use their own headings and hence many syno-
nyms or closely related concepts are used; for ex-
ample, hemodynamics versus blood presure and 
pulse or breathing versus oxidation. If the headings 
are obligatory, as in the Swedish narratives, nurses 
tend to write their observations under the heading 
which is somehow closest to the subject; for exam-
ple, body temperature under circulation or level of 
sedation under slep. 
For both languages the use of different abrevia-
tions is very comon. Almost every daily nursing 
narative included several abreviations. Most of 
the abreviations are typical for an ICU domain: 
CVP [central venous presure], PEEP [Positive 
End-Expiratory Presure], EN [Enteral Nutrition], 
TPN [Total Parenteral Nutrition], pO2 [partial 
presure of oxygen], pCO2 [partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide], MV [Minute Ventilation] and 
MAP [Mean Arterial Presure]. From a language 
technology point of view this means that ICU nurs-
ing naratives contain language-independent vo-
cabulary. However, nurses in both countries also 
use many language dependent abbreviations. 
3.2 Quantitative
analysis 
The Finish data set (n=514) was quantitatively 
analyzed using the morphological analyser FinT-
WOL and the disambiguator FinCG, (Ligsoft 
2010), and the Swedish data set (n=379) using the 
GTA, Granska Text Analyzer (Knutson et al., 
2003). Both data sets are rich in terms of amount 
of text and vocabulary (Table 2). It is also clear 
that the amount of text written per day and patient 
varies a lot in both data sets. More complex words 
were speled in numerous ways. For example, the 
pharmacological substance Noradrenalin had ap-
proximately 350 and 60 diferent spelings in the 
Finish and Swedish data sets, respectively. This 
problem is part of a more general issue of refer-
ence resolution e.g. when mapping diferent lexical 
terms refering to the same concept. 
In our quantitative analysis, we have included 
punctuation characters. In the Swedish data there 
was a large amount of html-tags and other format-
ting characters, which has a high impact on the 
total number of tokens (se Table 2). Moreover, as 
Finish is highly inflective, FinCG produces alter-
native lemas, hence it is possible to reduce the 
sparseness of the data by processing the output by 
chosing only one alternative lema (se total 
number of types in Table 2).  
To further illustrate the richnes of ICU nursing 
language, the number of unique bigrams (e.g., “is 
not”, “oxidate wel” and “night time” (note: a mis-
speled compound) are the most comon ones for 
Finish) and trigrams (e.g., “oxygeneated and ven-
tilated”, “and ventilate wel” are among the most 
comon ones for Finish) were 368,16 (275,205 
after FinCG) and 745,407 (356,307 after FinCG) 
for Finish patient records. For the Swedish data, 
the number of unique bigrams was 469,455 
(344,127 after GTA) and 1,064,944 (905,539 after 
GTA). Examples of comon Swedish ICU bi-
grams and trigrams include “circulation stabile”, 
“during night”, “in conection with”, and “with 
good efect”. Of the content of Finish nursing 
naratives, 11% are verbs, 7% nouns and les than 
1% pronouns. For Swedish nursing naratives, the 
respective percentages are 1%, 27% and 2%. One 
reason for the high numbers for nouns in the Swed-
ish data might be due to the large amount of 
(obligatory) headings relative to the Finnish data 
(se Table 3). 
To suport fluent information flow, language 
technology is neded to strengthen referential con-
gruence. Much of this richnes of vocabulary is 
explained by abbreviations and personal difer-
ences in professional jargon. In particular, abbre-
viations were comon. Based on the analysis of 
the most comon words, abreviations were rela-
tively established in Swedish data. For the Finish 
data, abbreviations were less standard but RR, SR, 
CVP, h, ad, ml, ok, vas. [vasen, left] and oik. 
[oikea, right] were extremely comon. Thus, ref-
erential congruence can be strengthened by spell-
ing out the most comon abreviations 
automatically. 
Adding topical content headings is another way 
to suport information flow. Topical content head-
ings were mandatory for Swedish data, but no de-
57
fault headings for Finish existed. However, the 
headings for Finnish were established in terms of 
content. In Table 3, we see that the headings for 
both languages cover similar topics, which indi-
cates that the clinical information need is similar 
for profesionals in both countries (and languages). 
Thus, we recomend forming a standardized set of 
headings from which the user can voluntarily se-
lect the ones to be used. This does not exclude add-
ing other headings. Another alternative is to 
develop language technology for topic segmenta-
tion and labeling. We have promising results from 
this approach (se, e.g., Suominen 2009).  
Temporal expresions (e.g., time, evening, night) 
were often used in both data sets. This poses the 
question of tense analysis of verbs being unneces-
sary and the time-related words being enough to 
imply the neded temporal information. It is also 
interesting to note that the negations inte [not, 
Swe], ingen [none, Swe], ej [not, Swe] and ei 
[no/not, Fin] are all among the most comon 
types, which is an important property to take into 
account in information extraction applications. 
Furthermore, words regarding the oral cavity, such 
as breathing and mucus, as well as relations, such 
as daughter, son, wife, and husband are very com-
mon in both data sets.  
Inspired by the tf×idf-measure from information 
retrieval, we also analyzed the most comon 
words in terms of a) the number of patients in 
whose documents the word was used and b) the 
number of daily nursing naratives in which the 
word was used. Here, we found, in both data sets, 
that those words that were used for all patients as 
wel as al daily naratives, wer very similar in 
both data sets, and were related to the most com-
mon headings, temporal expresions, negations and 
monitoring (e.g., increase, continue, begin). 
The amount of Protected Health Information 
(PHI) in form of person names was equal in both 
of the data sets: 1.5 person names per thousand 
tokens. This is notable, since this has implications 
when it comes to integrity isues and reuse of data 
for research purposes. 
FinCG did not recognize 36% of the content of 
Finish nursing naratives. However, words 
marked as unrecognized by FinCG also included 
punctuation marks. In our previous study (se 
Suominen 209 and references therein), we tai-
lored FinCG by extending approximately 35,000 
clinical terms. The extension not only substantialy 
improved the applicability of FinCG to the health 
domain but also initiated piloting of our language 
technology components in an authentic healthcare 
environment in the fall 208. This lead to the re-
lease of comercial language technology for Fin-
nish health records (Lingsoft 2010). 
 
Data Finish Swedish  
Total number of patients  514  379  
Total number of  
tokens,  
types (unique tokens) and 
types after processing 
 
1,227,909 
63,328 
38,649 
 
1,959,271 

41,883 
Number of tokens per patient: 
Minimum 
Maximum 
Average 
Standard deviation 
 
540 
14,118 
2,389 
1,635  
 
92 
36,830 
5,169 
5,271 
Total number of  
daily documents and 
shifts 
 
5,915 
17,103 
 
4,700 
– 
Number of tokens per daily 
document: 
Minimum 
Maximum 
Average 
Standard deviation 
 
 
0 
915 
208 
87 
 
 
5 
9,389 
417 
239 
 
Table 2. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data 
sets: total amount of text per patient. A daily document, 
i.e. nursing narative, contains all text written about a 
given patient during a calendar day. 
 
Finish n ≈ Swedish  n = 
Hemodynamics  7,800  Respiratory 11,301  
Consciousnes  6,900  Circulation 10,630  
Relatives 5,700  Elimination 10,041  
Diuresis 5,400  Nutrition 8,258  
Breathing 4,500  Comunication  5,880  
Oxygenation  3,600  Event Time  5,681  
Other 3,200  Pain 4,732  
Excretion 590  Psychosocial  4,682  
Hemodialysis  370  Slep 4,438  
Pulse 160  Skin 4,402  
Skin 160  Activity 3,794  
 
Table 3. Comparison of Finnish and Swedish ICU data 
sets: the most comon headings. For the Finnish data, 
where default headings were not given, we aproxi-
mated the amount of heading by using an automated 
heuristics followed by manual combination of headings 
with the same meaning. 
58
For Swedish, GTA handles unknown words dif-
ferently than FinCG. However, by comparing the 
ICU words with a Swedish general language cor-
pus (PAROLE, Gelerstam et al. (2000)), we found 
that 69% of the types are not included in PAROLE, 
which indicates a ned for tailoring GTA (or simi-
lar tools for Swedish) with domain-specific ICU 
terms. 
4 Conclusions

The purpose of this study was to do content and 
lexical analysis of nursing naratives written in an 
ICU. Our findings are that, even though the Fin-
nish and Swedish languages are not linguisticaly 
closely related, the way of writing clinical nursing 
ICU narratives in both countries is very similar. 
Moreover, the writen context made sentences 
clear for content experts, even though the texts 
were ful of specialized jargon, mispelings, ab-
breviations, and mising subjects and objects. 
However, these characteristics make clinical text 
challenging for language technology. For example 
coreference resolution as in the case of noradrena-
lin. 
We have also shown that the content characteris-
tics of Finish and Swedish ICU nursing naratives 
are very similar. This implies that developing tols 
for documentation suport in ICUs is not country 
or language dependant in that respect. Developing 
such tols may improve possibilities for informa-
tion extraction and text mining, enabling the posi-
bilities to reuse the vast amounts of important 
practice-based information and evidence captured 
in clinical naratives. The framework we have in-
troduced here could easily be employed in other 
studies of clinical texts. 
6 Future
work 
In the future, we wil use the results of this study in 
developing language technology for Finnish, Swe-
dish and other Nordic ICU naratives. We wil 
study how to identify abreviations, misspellings 
and normalize and correct them, by using various 
distance measures and concept management tech-
niques. We wil also study how to automaticaly 
identify important parts of text and highlight them. 
Furthermore, we are interested in studying text 
provenance and pragmatics in this particular set-
ting. In adition, we will evaluate the influence of 
these technology components in clinical practice. 
We wil also adres similarities and differences in 
clinical text writen by various profesional groups 
or at other hospital wards and health care units. 
Finaly, we are eager to sek posibilities to incor-
porate laymen's information needs and their inter-
action with health care providers into our study. 
Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank Nordforsk and the Nordic 
Council of Ministers for the funding of our research 
network HEXAnord – HEalth teXt Analysis network in 
the Nordic and Baltic countries and NICTA, funded by 
the Australian Government as represented by the De-
partment of Broadband, Communications and the Digi-
tal Economy and the Australian Research Council 
through the ICT Centre of Excellence program. We 
would also like to thank the Department of Information 
Technology and TUCS, University of Turku, Finland. 
References 
Lars Borin, Natalia Grabar, Catalina Halet, Davis 
Hardcastle, Maria Toporowska Gronostaj, Dimitrios 
Kokinakis, Sandra Wiliams and Alistair Wilis. 
2007. Empowering the patient with language tech-
nology. SemanticMining NoE 507505: Deliverable 
D27.2. <htp:/gup.ub.gu.se/gup/record/index.xsql?pu
bid=53590>  
Grace Yuet-Che Chung. 2009. Towards identifying 
intervention arms in randomized controlled trials: ex-
tracting cordinating constructions. Journal of Bio-
medical Informatics. 42(5):790–800  
Hercules Dalianis, Martin Hasel and Sumithra Velupil-
lai. 209. The Stockholm EPR Corpus Characteris-
tics and Some Initial Findings. Procedings of 
ISHIMR 209, Evaluation and implementation of e-
health and health information initiatives: interna-
tional perspectives. 14th International Symposium 
for Health Information Management Research, Kal-
mar, Sweden, 14-16 October, 2009, pp 243-249, pdf. 
Awarded best paper.  
Anna Ehrenberg, Margareta Ehnfors and Ingrid Thorel-
Ekstrand. 196. Nursing documentation in patient re-
cords: experience of the use of the VIPS model. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing 24, 853–867. 
Martin Gelerstam, Yvone Cederholm, and Torgny 
Rasmark. The bank of Swedish. In: Procedings of 
LREC 200 -The 2nd International Conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation, pages 329–333, 
Athens, Grece. 
Udo Hahn and Joachim Wermter. 2004. High-
performance tagging on medical texts. Procedings 
of the 20th international conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics. Geneva, Switzerland.  
59
Henk Harkema, Dowling JN, Thornblade T, Chapman 
WW. 209. ConText: an algorithm for determining 
negation, experiencer, and temporal status from clin-
ical reports. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 
2009;42(5):839–51. 
Ragnhild Helesø. 205. Information handling in the 
nursing discharge notes, Journal of Clinical Nursing, 
Volume 15 Isue 1, 11 21. Blackwel publishing  
Gunlög Josefson. 199. Få feber eler tempa? Några 
tankar om agentivitet i medicinskt fackspråk, Alla 
tiders språk: en vänskrift till Gertrud Petterson. 
Pages 127. Institutionen för nordiska språk. Lund. (In 
Swedish) 
Hyeoneui Kim, Sergey Goryachev, Craciela Rosemblat, 
Allen Browne, Alla Keselman and Qing Zeng-
Treitler. 2007. Beyond surface characteristics: a new 
health text-specific readability measurement. AMIA 
Annual Symp. 11:418-22. 
Ola Knutson, Johnny Bigert, and Vigg Kann. 203. A 
robust shalow parser for Swedish. In Proceedings 
14th Nordic Conf. on Comp. Ling. NODALIDA. 
Sirka Lauri and Sana Salanterä;. 2002. Developing an 
instrument to measure and describe clinical decision 
making in different nursing fields. Journal of Profes-
sional Nursing. Mar-Apr;18(2), 93-100. 
Lingsoft. 2010, Lingsoft Oy, http:/ww.lingsoft.fi/ 
Clement J. McDonald. 197. The Bariers to Electronic 
Medical Record Systems and How to Overcome 
Them. JAMIA. 197;4:213–221.  
Stéphane M. Meystre, Guergana K. Savova, Karin C. 
Kiper-Schuler and John E. Hurdle. 208. Extracting 
Information from Textual Documents in the Elec-
tronic Health Record: a Review of Recent Research. 
Yearbok Med Inform. 208:128-44. 
Raymond L. Ownby 205. Influence of Vocabulary and 
Sentence Complexity and Pasive Voice on the 
Readability of Consumer-Oriented Mental Health In-
formation on the Internet. AMIA Anual Symposium 
Proceedings. 205: 585–588. 
Serguei V. S. Pakhomov, Ani Coden and Christopher 
G. Chute. 206. Developing a corpus of clinical notes 
manualy anotated for part-of-spech. International 
Journal of Medical Informatics. 206 Jun;75(6):418-
29. Epub 2005 Sep 19. 
Patientdatalagen (208:35) Svensk författnings-
samling, Socialdepartementet, 2008, Stockholm. (In 
Swedish) 
Hana Suominen. 209. Machine Learning and Clinical 
Text: Suporting Health Information Flow. TUCS 
Dissertations No 125, Turku Centre for Computer 
Science, 209, Turku, Finland.  
Hana Suominen, Heljä Lundgrén-Laine, Sana Salan-
terä, Helena Karsten, and Tapio Salakoski. 2009. In-
formation flow in intensive care naratives. In Chen 
J, Chen C, Ely J, Hakani-Tr D, He J, Hsu H.-H, 
Liao L, Liu C, Pop M, Ranganathan S, Redy C.K, 
Ruan J, Song Y, Tseng V.S, Ungar L, Wu D, Wu Z, 
Xu K, Yu H, Zelikovsky A, editors. Procedings 
IEE International Cnfernce on Binfrmatics 
and Biomedicine Workshops, BIBM 209, pages 
325–330. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi-
neers, Los Alamitos, California, USA.  
Kaarina Tantu and Helena Ikonen. 2007. Nationaly 
standardized electronic nursing documentation in 
Finland by the year 207. Stud Health Technol In-
form.122:540-1. 
Asta Thorodsen, Kaija Saranto, Anna Ehrenberg, Wal-
ter Sermeus. 209. Models, standards and structures 
of nursing documentation in European countries. 
Stud Health Technol Inform.146:327-31. 
Katrin Tomanek, Joachim Wermter and Udo Hahn. 
2007. A Reappraisal of sentence and token spliting 
for life sciences documents. Stud Health Technol In-
form. 129 (Pt 1):524-8. 
Webster’s 2010. Webster’s New World Medical Dic-
tionary. 
http:/ww.medterms.com/script/main/hp.asp,last 
visited February 2, 2010. 
60

