Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Writing, pages 33–41,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
 
 
A Toolkit to Asist L2 Learners Become Independent Writers 
John Milton and Vivying S. Y. Cheng 
Language Center 
HKUST, Clear Water Bay 
Hong Kong 
{lcjohn,vivying}@ust.hk 
 
 
 
 
  
Abstract 
This paper describes a resource-rich tolkit 
that asists EFL writers take a discovery-
based aproach to writing acurate and fluent 
English.  The system helps learners identify 
lexico-gramatical erors by matching pat-
terns gleaned from a very large corpus of 
learners’ texts. Users are guided to apropri-
ate language paterns as they write and revise 
through online declarative and procedural re-
sources. Even as more robust and fuly auto-
matic fedback technologies evolve, 
comprehensive resource-rich suport wil re-
main necesary for second-language (L2) 
writers who must develop practical life-long 
language learning strategies.  To asist lan-
guage tutors suport novice L2 writers, we 
have also produced tols that help tutors rein-
force their students’ independent writing and 
profreading strategies.  The operation and ra-
tionale of this aproach have ben imple-
mented and evaluated in several Hong Kong 
universities and secondary schols. 
1Introduction 
Proofing technologies for L2 writers have been of 
interest to the NLP community since the 1970s, 
and have been subject to critical evaluation since 
the early 80s (e.g., Frase et al, 1981, Dobrin, 
1985).  In spite of continued interest in this area 
(e.g. Vernon, 200; Foster and Vogel, 204; Yi et 
al, 208; Bender, 209), computational linguists 
themselves remain disappointed with the lack of 
ongoing development of commercially available 
systems (Wampler, 202).  A more serious prob-
lem, from the view of applied linguists, is that en-
thusiasm for the technology has often resulted in a 
purely operational approach.  The focus on algo-
rithmic solutions to the correction of il-formed 
input has frequently overloked the long-term 
pedagogical needs of L2 novice writers. The pars-
ing techniques of grammar checkers may reliably 
flag a subset of L2 errors; however, there is some 
question as to whether automatically generated 
prescriptive advice, even when it is reliable, actu-
ally helps learner language evolve (Bolt, 192; 
Chen, 197). While machine-generated error iden-
tification and correction may be a desirable con-
venience for casual writers, explicit correction by a 
machine, or for that matter, a human tutor, appears 
to be counterproductive in the development of an 
L2 writer’s proficiency (Truscot, 196; Ferris and 
Hedgcock, 205). 
The goal of the project described here is to de-
velop a suite of tols that wil help novice writers 
who are learning to write in academic or profes-
sional contexts improve the accuracy and fluency 
of their texts, while also becoming more confident 
in their long-term comand of English.  We have 
developed companion tols to help teachers of 
writing improve the efficiency and reliability of 
their feedback, and move L2 novice writers toward 
life-long independence. The folowing section out-
lines some of the limitations of currently available 
grammar checking software in accomplishing these 
goals. 
2Limitations of Parsing Technology 
Most grammar checking programs use some form 
of parsing to identify errors.  Typically, if a sen-
tence is ungrammatical according to a set of pars-
ing rules, the programs attempt alternate analysis. 
However, the unconstrained text of L2 learners is 
33
 
 
difficult to parse.  Even more demanding is the 
ability of software (or, very often, human tutors) to 
sugest a ‘correct’ version that reflects the writer’s 
intention.  This requires semantic disambiguation 
well beyond our current ontology or technology. 
The difficulties in parsing natural language are 
compounded in the case of interlanguage (Schnei-
der and McCoy, 198).  Parsers generally are 
based on theoretical models of how grammatical 
sentences of the target language should be con-
structed.  This approach is especially ineffective 
for cases where the speakers’ first language is lin-
guistically remote from the target language.  For 
example, the curent version of the parser-based 
grammar checker in Microsoft Word sacrifices a 
low rate of recall for a relatively high rate of preci-
sion in the analysis of Chinese speakers’ English 
texts. That is, it displays few flagged errors com-
pared to the total number of errors actually occur-
ring in a text, a necesary trade-off resulting from 
the need to reduce distracting false positives. This 
is understandable since the rates of recall and pre-
cision for various grammatical constituents are 
inconsistent, and the numbers of false positives are 
not easily reduced acros all types of grammatical 
constructions. 
The insufficient, but nevertheless often stil in-
accurate, and frequently non-existent, advice of 
these programs is easily demonstrated.  Folowing 
are a few common sentence-level errors produced 
by Chinese-speaking novice writers, and the com-
ments generated by the Microsoft Word grammar 
checker: 
1. It worth studying hard. 
[Advice: Fragment (consider revising)] 
2. I born in Hong Kong. 
[Advice: substitute I bore / I had born / I have 
born] 
3. There have three students there. 
[Error not flagged] 
 
These errors are typical examples of learners’ at-
tempts to map Chinese syntax on English construc-
tions (treating ‘worth’, which functions here as a 
preposition
1, as a verb, forcing the passive verb 
‘born’ into an active construction, and blending the 
verbs ‘be’ and ‘have’ into one form, as their 
                                                             
1
 The tendency of most dictionaries to label ‘worth’ as an ad-
jective, regardles of its function in the sentence, may com-
pound the confusion for speakers of Chinese, who often 
confuse adjective and noun forms and functions. 
equivalents are in Chinese).  The first comment is 
unhelpful; all options in the second set of suges-
tions are, bizarrely, further from Standard English 
than the student’s original text, and the third sen-
tence passes without comment. 
In addition to its general unreliability for L2 
writers, grammar/style-checking software has been 
censured for giving overly narrow and prescriptive 
advice (Pennington, 192), for compounding the 
already constrained nature of L2 production 
(Chapelle, 201) and for otherwise abusing the 
tenets of god pedagogy (McGee and Ericsson, 
202). Even if the reliability of parsing technology 
can be significantly enhanced, much of the compo-
sition research of the last fifty years has argued 
against imposing corrections on the texts of novice 
writers.  Current theories of language pedagogy 
promote learner independence and discourage di-
rect correction by tutors. In light of the limitations 
of writing software, reliance on a deus ex machina 
for correction is hardly a desirable alternative to 
dependence on a language tutor. 
A more principled, and ultimately more valid, 
role for language tols in suporting L2 novice 
writers is to enable them to test their evolving hy-
potheses of the L2.  This should free the human 
tutor in an academic context to act as a guide, en-
suring that these hypotheses evolve. 
3Asisting L2 Writers become Independ-
ent 
Our objective has been to develop a program that 
avoids machine-generated prescription, while still 
helping L2 writers identify common grammatical, 
lexical and style errors. Instead of proscribing us-
age and preempting users’ choices, we expose L2 
writers to authentic language and help them be-
come aware of the differences between their inter-
language and the particular L2 genre they are 
attempting to produce. 
Unlike typical grammar checkers, our program 
does not appropriate the embryonic text of novice 
writers. Many of these learners wil spend much of 
their profesional life writing in the L2, and they 
need to develop independence.  While not explic-
itly correcting lexico-grammatical errors, we aim 
to sensitize learners to common errors, without 
relying on a generic parser. 
34
 
 
 
Figure 1: A discovery-based model of the writing proc-
es. 
Figure 1 ilustrates our model of a discovery-
based approach for L2 writers. During the writing 
process, learners can consult resources that provide 
information on problematic L2 grammatical struc-
tures, as well as the semantic and colocational 
properties of L2 lexis. Users are guided through a 
discovery process that helps them become respon-
sible for their own writing, thus reducing the bur-
den on both software and human tutors to identify 
and correct errors. The role of the software, and of 
the human tutor, is to assist the writer express 
meaning in an acceptable manner, rather than ex-
plicitly to interpret the writer’s text. 
Our approach allows L2 writers to improve in 
two fundamentally different ways: through didactic 
explanations and via an inductive/procedural ap-
proach. They can chose either method or a com-
bination, depending on the nature of the language 
problem and each user’s learning style (e.g., their 
extent of ‘field dependence’, see Witkin et al., 
197). 
The program ‘Check My Words’ (Figure 2) 
gives L2 novice writers access to interactive ex-
planations of common structural and lexical errors 
from an Internet grammar as they write.  These 
explanations are based on an analysis of a large L2 
corpus consisting of milions of words of the writ-
ing of Chinese speakers, from which a typology of 
misused, and blatantly underused or overused lexi-
cal and structural patterns, was extracted (e.g., Mil-
ton, 201).  Hundreds of problematic words and 
paterns in a learner’s text are explained.  This is 
the kind of didactic, deductive advice that a god 
textbok might provide, except that there are few 
textboks targeted directly at the EFL learning dif-
ficulties of speakers of particular L1s, and this in-
ternet grammar is embelished with interactive 
multimedia: it is fun to use. 
Secondly, the program enables learners to dis-
cover how the language they are strugling to use 
is formulated in relevant, professionally writen 
texts.  They have a choice of search engines that 
they can use to lok up words in context.  To-
gether, these search engines adress many of the 
problems learners encounter in chosing words, 
forms and constructions.  This inductive, proce-
dural access to writing models, combined with the 
feedback tutors can provide via companion tols, 
greatly increases the amount of positive and nega-
tive evidence about the L2 available to the novice 
writer—suport that researchers of applied linguis-
tics believe promotes language acquisition (e.g., 
Trahey and White, 193, Doughty and Varela, 
198). 
In addition to helping learners become more 
confident, responsible, and independent in select-
ing language that is both accurate and appropriate 
to their purposes, this approach helps relieve lan-
guage tutors of the need to act as proofreading 
slaves. When learners are given the tols to attend 
to form, taught how to use the tols, and held ac-
countable for their own progress, teachers can 
share more of the burden of responsibility for 
learning with their students.  This approach re-
duces the need to impose corrections, either by 
human or machine intervention.  The next section 
explains this procedure in more detail. 
4Promoting language awarenes 
‘Check My Words’ is designed to encourage learn-
ers of English become aware of the role of lexis, 
forms, and functions in the L2, and to self-correct. 
Errors in the L2 writing of Chinese speakers have 
been analyzed and compiled into an online gram-
mar guide mapped to the user’s word processor so 
that problematic words and structures can be que-
ried during the writing process to determine if they 
are misused in the writer’s document.  
An example is one of the interlanguage patterns 
we noted earlier: ‘It worth studying hard.’  In such 
cases, where the error is easily captured as a lexical 
pattern (‘worth’ occurring without the verb ‘be’), 
the program highlights the pattern, and the user 
then presses a ‘Check’ buton to see posible er-
rors, with the most probable error highlighted 
(Figure 3).  The user selects a link to consult the 
English Grammar Guide (EG). 
35
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: The type of prompt that apears when a 
learner ‘checks’ a highlighted expresion. 
 
Explanations in the EG are accompanied by 
examples and a mini-test.  Interesting multimedia 
resources are also used to ilustrate the explanation. 
For example, in Figure 4, the use of the word 
‘worth’ is exemplified in an advertisement that 
sells its products with the rationalization that 
‘you’re worth it’. 
 
Figure 4: An explanatory fragment of the word ‘worth’ 
from the English Gramar Guide. 
 
Over 50 lexico-grammatical errors are indexed, 
based on a comprehensive analysis of a corpus of 
the learners’ texts.  Figure 5 ilustrates a carton 
conversation adressing another common error in 
this interlanguage—the blending of the verb and 
adjective functions of ‘concern’ (e.g., ‘I concern 
about…’). 
 
Figure 5: An explanatory fragment of the word ‘con-
cern’ from the English Gramar Guide. 
In addition to an online descriptive grammar, the 
program points users to procedural/inductive re-
sources—online lokup engines—where they can 
explore the contextual properties of difficult L2 
patterns and retrieve colocates of any word or pat-
tern. 
 
 
Figure 6: The pul-down list of resources on the Check 
My Words tolbar. 
 
Users chose one of these resources from the 
Check My Words tolbar (Figure 6), and the pro-
gram generates apropriate search syntax for each 
lokup resource (a Gogle search of the web, news 
or scholarly articles, or via our own lokup engine, 
‘Word Neighbors’).  These resources provide 
 
Figure 2: The Check My Words tolbar for EFL learners. 
36
 
 
‘snapshots’ of the word or structure in context, 
which is especially useful for learners who have 
not read widely in the L2.  Word Neighbors dis-
plays the colocational properties of words and 
phrases in selected, professionally writen texts, 
and provides learners the oportunity to explore 
the relationship between their own output and L2 
target forms. Users are guided in loking up words 
and expresions in Word Neighbors via the dia-
logue shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7: The dialogue prompt for Word Neighbors. 
The features of Word Neighbors’ can be demon-
strated by again exploring the sample error: It 
worth studying hard.  Figure 8 displays the word 
worth as the target word.  The search parameters 
are set by default to display mising words and to 
sugest alternatives for malformed words.  Word 
Neighbors also displays paterns as they occur in 
various genres.  The parameters Show X words 
before/after allow users to select the number of 
words to be shown before or after the target word. 
The Span X word(s) drop-down enables the user to 
investigate posible mising or redundant words in 
a phrase, and the Show all word forms checkbox 
enables users to display all forms of a word. 
The first screen from the Word Neighbors 
search result (Figure 8) shows all classes2 of the 
target word and, in this case, the classes that nor-
mally precede that word.  The user has empirical 
evidence that worth is usually a preposition pre-
ceded by a copula verb.  Clicking Show results 
displays specific instances of this patern (Figure 
9).  Clicking See contexts then displays sentences 
and paragraphs containing the words (Figure 10). 
The difference between our approach to error 
correction and that of systems that rely on auto-
matic detection is well ilustrated by preposition 
errors.  Chodorow et al (207), for example, dis-
cus a method for detecting preposition errors that 
they report achieves a precision of 0.8 and a recall 
of 0.3. 
                                                             
2
 Texts are taged with CLAWS (Garside and Smith, 1997). 
 
Figure 8: Word Neighbors displays search result of the 
word ‘worth’ in diferent word clas paterns 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Word Neighbors displays the search result for 
the patern VERB + PREP. 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Word Neighbors displays sentences contain-
ing the patern ‘is worth’. 
 
 
37
 
 
While this type of ambitious scientific research 
is important and interesting, it is stil of limited use 
by non-native writers.  We have not attempted to 
flag preposition errors unless they are invariable 
associated with a frequently misused lexical pat-
tern (e.g., ‘They demanded for more time.’).  In-
stead, the novice writer is encouraged to use a 
resource such as Word Neighbors to lok up the 
typical patterns of prepositions. These errors lend 
themselves well to such a pattern-matching ap-
proach.  If we take this error as an example, the 
user has only to highlight the words surrounding 
the preposition, and lok up the pattern ‘demanded 
* more’.  The program ellipts the preposition and 
loks for a span of three words, resulting in the 
display in Figure 11.  
Concordance-type tols such as Word Neigh-
bors provide authentic information about the pat-
terns of language, but the L2 writer must often 
decide which context is appropriate for a particular 
case.  Dialogue boxes and tutorials give learners 
guidance with this discovery-based learning ap-
proach.  Suporting pedagogical materials that 
teachers using these tols have developed alow 
learners to practice correcting sentence level er-
rors.  The materials are aimed particularly at in-
creasing the learners’ awareness of colocational 
restrictions and at encouraging them to lok up 
colocational properties.  The materials have been 
integrated into EFL courses at several Hong Kong 
universities and secondary schools. 
 
 
Figure 11: Word Neighbors displays the paterns of 
‘demanded * more’. 
We have found that in institutional contexts 
where novice writers may have learned to rely 
completely on teacher feedback for correction, 
simply puting tols in students’ hands is not 
enough. In the next section, we describe compan-
ion tols that enable teachers to prompt their stu-
dents to notice particular errors and reformulate 
their sentences without the teacher’s explicit cor-
rection. 
5Resource-rich Fedback 
Teachers of academic writen English face enor-
mous problems when they, rather than the learners 
themselves, bear the burden for improving the ac-
curacy and fluency of their students’ texts. Teach-
ers are typically called upon to provide individual 
suport to large numbers of students who are often 
at various levels of acquisition and who have a 
wide range of motivational drives and individual 
needs.  These quantitative demands, together with 
the complexity of understanding and reformulating 
the texts of novice writers, limit the effectiveness 
of any feedback a teacher can provide. In addition, 
teachers often find themselves repeatedly identify-
ing and correcting errors that they have pointed out 
many times before. This is especially discouraging 
when the errors reoccur in the same student’s texts. 
This was the impetus for the design of Mark My 
Words, a companion to the students’ version, 
Check My Words.  Like Check My Words, it in-
stalls as a tolbar in Microsoft Word (Figure 12). 
Teachers can use this tol to insert ‘resource rich’ 
comments in students’ texts (e.g., Milton, 206). 
These comments include links to the resources 
available from the students’ Check My Words 
tolbar.  Students can be held accountable for re-
formulating their own texts using the same re-
sources they themselves have available during the 
writing process. 
The folowing steps ilustrate the process a 
teacher might use when responding to a student’s 
text.  This procedure is ideally employed after the 
student has completed at least one draft and fol-
lowed a revision process similar to that outlined in 
the previous section.  Let’s assume that a student 
has submited a text containing the error ilustrated 
previously (‘It worth studying.’). 
Teachers have a variety of options in comment-
ing on a text, depending on how explicit they want 
to be. When the teacher wants to bring an error to 
38
 
 
the student’s attention, the teacher puts the cursor 
on the word or highlights a phrase and clicks a 
Mark buton. The program attempts to identify the 
error based on simple heuristics (e.g., identifying 
the POS and any patern that matches a mal-rule), 
and dialogues such as the folowing one presented 
in figure 13 are available. 
The ‘Topic’ and ‘Hint’ text boxes contain boi-
lerplate comments that the teacher customizes as 
desired. The teacher can accept the default suges-
tions or select a resource or search engine and set 
parameters to display the Standard English lexical 
pattern.  The English Grammar Guide link, online 
dictionary, and Word Neighbors are selected in this 
example. These links then appear in the student’s 
text. These links reinforce the student’s familiarity 
with the resources, encouraging students to use the 
resources to revise their texts. 
The student has only to ‘mouse over’ the 
teacher’s initials to see each ‘resource rich’ com-
ment, and can click to open the resource.  In the 
example ilustrated in Figure 14, three resources 
are available: usage explanations (the ‘Click here 
for more advice and practice’ link points to the 
relevant page of the online English Gramar 
Guide), definitions (Cambridge Dictionary), and 
colocational patterns (Word Neighbors). 
Teachers can comment on repeated errors of the 
same type by clicking a ‘Copy Comment’ buton, 
although usually it is not necessary (nor advisable) 
to highlight every error.  Current feedback peda-
gogy sugests that, rather than highlighting all er-
rors, it is more effective to draw students’ attention 
to a subset of errors. In addition to comments cov-
ering the most distracting and disruptive types of 
sentence level errors, the Mark My Words program 
lists many other comments covering formatting, 
organization, style, content, and logic.  Teachers 
can easily add more coments, and customize and 
associate these with any concept or pattern in a 
student’s text, and these in turn with any online 
resources.  By having students concentrate on 
structures and lexis that are particularly difficult 
for each individual, we can more reasonably expect 
L2 novice writers to learn to identify and revise 
these problems themselves.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: dialogue boxes that alow teachers to custom-
ize coments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Mark My Words program retains a database 
of comments made on previous assignments so that 
a teacher knows whether a student has had atten-
tion drawn to particular lexical and structural prob-
lems.  At the botom of each text, teachers can 
generate a ‘Coments Table’ that summarizes the 
comments (Figure 15).  This allows teachers to 
maintain a record of comments given to particular 
students.  These coments and error logs are per-
manently available for students and teachers to 
refer to as prompts for each subsequent draft and 
revision. 
Figure 14: a coment from Mark My Words. 
 
Figure 12: The Mark My Words tolbar for tutors of English. 
39
 
 
This procedure does not necessarily replace 
classroom instruction or individual consultation. 
However, by encouraging EFL learners to use such 
resources, and demonstrating their usefulness 
through instruction and as part of the feedback 
process, we can equip learners to proofread for 
themselves, and help them assume responsibility 
for becoming independent writers. 
 
 
Figure 15: a sumary of coments from Mark My 
Words. 
6Implementation and Asesment 
The tols and techniques described above have 
been designed with the needs of intermediate and 
advanced EFL learners in mind—especially Chi-
nese-speaking secondary and tertiary students. 
This approach meets many of the requirements laid 
out for corpus-based language learning tols (e.g., 
Ghadessy et al, 201 and Romer, 206).  Other 
work in this area (e.g., Gaskell and Cob, 204) 
has ilustrated the promise that such methods have 
for enabling teachers to guide students in accessing 
and understanding the discrepancy between their 
language patterns and those of Standard English. 
The programs have been integrated into EFL 
courses at several Hong Kong universities and sec-
ondary schols and continue to undergo refine-
ments based on user feedback.  A comprehensive 
evaluation of students’ and teachers’ reactions to 
the programs emphasizes the need for training and 
pedagogical materials that suport teachers and 
students: a number of genre-specific writing syla-
buses (e.g., lab-report writing) are being built 
around the use of the programs. 
Although our main aim is not to identify all er-
rors or prescribe correction, the ability of the 
Check My Words program to identify the lexico-
grammatical errors of a specific cohort of L2 writ-
ers (Chinese speakers of English) is steadily im-
proving.  We maintain an ‘Asignment 
Management System’, through which students and 
teachers exchange electronic documents. This sys-
tem enables us to colect user-generated knowledge 
in the form of common errors in the L2 writing of 
this cohort of users, as well as errors tagged by 
their language teachers.  Students who use the 
Check My Words program currently submit ap-
proximately 1 milion words per month, and teach-
ers tag about 15,00 errors in these texts monthly, 
using the Mark My Words program.  We are able 
to mine these texts for mal-rules and for the usage 
marked by their teachers, and we can use the cor-
pus as an iterative test bed for error checking. 
A quantitative analysis of about a milion words 
of the re-drafted texts of students who have used 
the program, and another milion words of those 
who did not use the program during composition 
show significant improvements in accuracy and 
fluency of those who used the program.  Students 
who folow this process tend to use a wider range 
of language formulae and, as well as gaining con-
fidence in using the tols to check lexis and struc-
tures, they more successfuly attempt grammatical 
structures normally avoided in the novice L2 writ-
ing of speakers of Chinese (such as modality and 
subordination).  In surveys, the L2 novice writers 
report that they find the programs ‘very useful’. 
Teachers report that students who used the pro-
gram as a proofreading aid were able to self-
correct more reliably than students who did not use 
the program. 
However, although the technical infrastructure 
of Hong Kong schols and universities can easily 
accommodate these programs (students and teach-
ers generally have access to god computer facili-
ties), the adoption of this method of feedback by 
teachers has been slow. Examination-driven teach-
ing practices emphasize teacher-centered methods, 
and teachers have litle incentive to encourage stu-
dents in independent learning and discovery-based 
writing.  Nevertheless, most teachers who try this 
method quickly become proficient and embrace it, 
recognizing that it can help transfer the burden for 
proofreading to their students.  They appreciate 
being able to customize and share comments, and 
avoid explicit correction, while stil assisting stu-
dents and holding them accountable for conveying 
meaning in an acceptable manner and in their own 
words. 
40
 
 
7Conclusion 
The programs described in this paper demonstrate 
techniques that can help L2 writers acquire accu-
racy and fluency in writen English and develop 
life-long writing habits in the L2.  The approach 
takes advantage of online resources to help stu-
dents and teachers shift from a machineor 
teacher-centered pedagogy to one that puts the L2 
writer at the center of the writing process by mak-
ing the learner accountable, and ultimately more 
confident and independent. The Check My Words 
and Mark My Words programs described in this 
paper are available from htp:/mywords.ust.hk/. 
References 
E. M. Bender. 209. Linguisticaly Naïve!=Language 
Independent: Why NLP Neds Linguistic Typology. 
Procedings of the EACL 209 Workshop on the In-
teraction betwen Linguistics and Computational 
Linguistics: Virtuous, Vicious or Vacuous? Athens, 
Grece, 26–32. 
P. Bolt. 192. An evaluation of gramar-checking pro-
grams as self-help learning aids for learners of Eng-
lish as a foreign language. Computer Assisted 
Learning, 5(1–2):49–9. 
C. Chapele. 201. Computer Applications in Second 
Language Acquisition: Foundations for Teaching, 
Testing, and Research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Pres.  
J. F. Chen. 197. Computer generated eror fedback 
and the writing proces. TESL-EJ Teaching English 
as a second Foreign Language, 2(3). 
M. Chodorow, J. Tetreault, and N.-R. Han. 207. Detec-
tion of gramatical erors involving prepositions. 
Procedings of the Fourth ACL-SIGSEM Workshop 
on Prepositions, Prague, Czech Republic: Asocia-
tion for Computational Linguistics, 25–30. 
D. N. Dobrin. 1985. Style analyzers once more. Com-
puters and Composition, 3:2–32. 
D. Feris. and J. S. Hedgcock. 205. Teaching ESL 
Composition: Purpose, Proces, and Practice (2nd 
ed.) Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Asociates. 
J. Foster. and J. Vogel. 2004. Parsing Il-Formed Text 
Using an Error Gramar. Artificial Inteligence Re-
view, 21(3-4):269–291. 
L. T. Frase, N. H. Macdonald, P. S. Gingrich, S. A. 
Kenan and J. L. Colymore, 1981. Computer aids 
for text asesment and writing instruction, NSPI 
Journal, 21. 
D. Gaskel, and T. Cob. 204. Can learners use con-
cordance fedback for writing erors? System, 32(3): 
301–319. 
M. Ghadesy, A. Henry, and R. Rosebery, (eds.). 201. 
Smal Corpus Studies and ELT: Theory and Practice, 
John Benjamins. 
R. Garside, and N. Smith. 1997. A hybrid gramatical 
tager: CLAWS4, In R. Garside, G. Leech and A. 
McEnery. (eds.) Corpus Annotation: Linguistic In-
formation from Computer Text Corpora. Longman, 
London, 102–121. 
T. McGe and P. Ericson. 202. The Politics of the 
Program: MS Word as the Invisible Gramarian, 
Computers and Composition, 19:453–470. 
J. Milton. 201. Elements of a Writen Interlanguage: a 
computational and corpus-based study of institu-
tional influences on the acquisition of English by 
Hong Kong Chinese students. HKUST, Hong Kong. 
J. Milton. 2006. Resource-Rich Web-Based Fedback: 
helping learners become independent writers, In Hy-
land, K. and Hyland F. (eds.) Fedback in Second 
Language Writing: Contexts and Isues, Cambridge 
University Pres, 123–137. 
M. C. Penington. 192. Beyond of-the-shelf computer 
remedies for student writers: Alternatives to caned 
fedback. System, 20(4):423–447. 
D. Schneider. and K. F. McCoy. 1998. Recognizing 
syntactic erors in the writing of second language 
learners. Procedings of the 36th conference on As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics volume 2. 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
. Trahey. and L. White. 193. Positive evidence and 
premption in the L2 clasrom. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 15:181–204. 
J. Truscot. 196. The case against gramar corection 
in L2 writing clases. Language Learning, 46(2): 
327-369. 
A. Vernon. 200. Computerized gramar checkers 
200: capabilities, limitations, and pedagogical pos-
sibilities. Computers and Composition, 17:329–349. 
B. Wampler. 202. A computer scientist's lament: 
gramar has lost its technological edge. The New 
York Times.  
H. A. Witkin, C. More, D. Godenough, and P. Cox. 
1977. Field Dependent and Field Independent Cogni-
tive Styles and their Educational Implications, Re-
view of Educational Research, 47:1–64. 
X. Yi, J. Gao and W. B. Dolan. 208. A Web-based 
English Profing System for English as a Second 
Language Users Procedings of the Third Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Proc-
esing volume 1. 
 
41

