Semantic Computing and Language Knowledge Bases1 
 
Lei Wang  
Key Laboratory of Computational Linguistics 
of Ministry of Education 
Department of English, Peking University 
wangleics@pku.edu.cn 
Shiwen Yu  
Key Laboratory of Computational 
Linguistics of Ministry of Education, 
Peking University 
yusw@pku.edu.cn 
                                                 
1 This
work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 60970083) and Chiang Ching-kuo 
Foundation for International Scholarly Exchange (2009). 
Abstract 
As the proposition of the next-generation 
Web – semantic Web, semantic computing 
has been drawing more and more attention 
within the circle and the industries. A lot of 
research has been conducted on the theory 
and methodology of the subject, and 
potential applications have also been 
investigated and proposed in many fields. 
The progress of semantic computing made 
so far cannot be detached from its 
supporting pivot – language resources, for 
instance, language knowledge bases. This 
paper proposes three perspectives of 
semantic computing from a macro view and 
describes the current status of affairs about 
the construction of language knowledge 
bases and the related research and 
applications that have been carried out on 
the basis of these resources via a case study 
in the Institute of Computational Linguistics 
at Peking University. 
 
1 Introduction

Semantic computing is a technology to compose 
information content (including software) based 
on meaning and vocabulary shared by people 
and computers and thereby to design and 
operate information systems (i.e., artificial 
computing systems). Its goal is to plug the 
semantic gap through this common ground, to 
let people and computers cooperate more 
closely, to ground information systems on 
people’s life world, and thereby to enrich the 
meaning and value of the entire life world. 
(Hasida, 2007) The task of semantic computing 
is to explain the meaning of various constituents 
of sentences (words or phrases) or sentences 
themselves in a natural language. We believe 
that semantic computing is a field that addresses 
two core problems: First, to map the semantics 
of user with that of content for the purpose of 
content retrieval, management, creation, etc.; 
second, to understand the meanings (semantics) 
of computational content of various sorts, 
including, but is not limited to, text, video, 
audio, network, software, and expressing them 
in a form that can be processed by machine.
 
Figure 1. Human-computer interaction is handicapped without semantic computing. 
But the way to the success of semantic 
computing is not even and it has taken a quite 
long time for researchers to make some 
progress in this field. The difficulties of 
semantic computing involve many aspects: 
ambiguity, polysemy, domain of quantifier, 
metaphor, etc. Different individuals will have 
different understanding of the same word or the 
same sentence. Research on the theory and 
methodology of semantic computing still has a 
long way to go. 
Now we provide an example in a search 
engine to show how difficult for the computer 
to understand the meaning of a word. We input 
two sentences into Google.com Translate and 
the following results were returned: 
 
Example 1   
I bought a table with three dollars.（ 20091016 Google: 本人买了 3 美元一表）  
I bought a table with three legs.   （ 20091016 Google: 本人买了 3 条腿的表）  
 
We know that the word ―table‖ has two 
common meanings in English (a wooden object 
and a structured data report). But in Chinese 
they correspond to two different words (表 biǎo  
and 桌子  zhuō zi 2). From Example 1, we can 
see that the search engine cannot distinguish the 
two senses and translate them both as 表 . Thus, 
without semantic analysis queries in a search 
engine may result in very poor performance. 
The first principle of a search engine is based 
on shallow Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
techniques, for instance, string matching, while 
future direction of search engines should aim at 
content index and the understanding of user’s 
intention. Semantic computing becomes 
applicable only with the development of deep 
NLP techniques. Machine Translation (MT) is 
the first application of digital computers in the 
non-digital world and semantic information is 
indispensable in MT research and applications. 
However, there has been no breakthrough to the 
extent of Natural Language Understanding 
(NLU) and semantic computing may serve as 
the key to some success in this field.  
2 Related
Work on Semantic Computing 
Semantics is an interesting but controversial 
topic. Many a theory has been proposed in 
attempt to describe what meaning really means. 
                                                 
2  Pinyin is currently the most commonly used 
Romanization system for standard Mandarin. The system 
is now used in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, parts 
of Taiwan, Malaysia and Singapore to teach Mandarin 
Chinese and internationally to teach Mandarin as a second 
language. It is also often used to spell Chinese names in 
foreign publications and can be used to enter Chinese 
characters on computers and cell phones. 
But up until now there has not been a theory 
that can describe the meaning of various 
language units (words, phrases and sentences) 
so perfectly that was accepted universally, even 
though Fillmore’s proposition of Framework 
semantics (1976) is successful enough. Since 
Gildea et al. (2002) initiated the research on 
automatic semantic role labeling, many 
evaluations have been conducted internationally, 
such as Senseval-3 and SemEval 2007, as well 
as CoNLL SRL Shared Task 2004, 2005 and 
2008. Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) is 
also a very important research subject and a lot 
of work has been done in this regard, such as 
Lesk (1986), Gale et al. (1998), Jin et al. (2007) 
and Qu et al. (2007) as the Chinese counterpart. 
As to the research on computing word sense 
relatedness, Dagan et al (1993) did some pilot 
work and Lee (1997) and Resnik (1999) 
contributed to the research on semantic 
similarity.  
In recent years, semantics-based analysis 
such as data and web mining, analysis of social 
networks and semantic system design and 
synthesis have begun to draw more attention 
from researchers. Applications using semantics 
such as search engines and question answering 
(Li et al., 2002), content-based multimedia 
retrieval and editing, natural language interfaces 
(Yokoi et al., 2005) based on semantics have 
also been attracting attentions. Even semantic 
computing has been applied to areas like music 
description, medicine and biology and GIS 
systems and architecture. The whole idea is how 
to realize human-centered computing. 
 
 
3 The
Theory and Methodology of 
Semantic Computing 
3.1 Important
Questions That Need to Be 
Asked about Semantic Computing 
In the past few years there has been a growing 
interest in the field of semantics and semantic 
computing. But there are questions that have 
been always lingering on researchers’ minds. 
What on earth semantics is? What is the best 
way to describe the meaning of a language unit? 
How can natural languages be processed so that 
we are able to benefit from human-computer 
interaction, or even interpersonal 
communication? It seems that no one can give 
satisfactory answers to these questions. But it is 
now commonly agreed that the study of 
semantic computing or knowledge 
representation is a central issue in 
computational linguistics. The major 
contributions on this topic are collected in 
Computational Linguistics (1987-2010) and 
International Journal of Semantic Computing 
(2007-2010). Research in computing semantics 
is, however, rather heterogeneous in scope, 
methods, and results. The traditional ―wh‖ and 
―how‖ questions need to be asked again to 
understand the consequences of conceptual and 
linguistic decisions in semantic computing: 
What? What should be computed in terms 
of semantics? Each word is a world and its 
meaning can be interpreted differently. Despite 
the interest that semantics has received from the 
scholars of different disciplines since the early 
history of humanity, a unifying theory of 
meaning does not exist, no matter whether we 
view a language from a lexical or a syntactic 
perspective. In practice, the quality and type of 
the expressed concepts again depend upon the 
one who uses it: any language speaker or writer, 
a linguist, a psychologist, a lexicographer, or a 
computer. In psycholinguistics and 
computational linguistics, semantic knowledge 
is modeled with very deep and formal 
expressions. Often semantic models focus on 
some very specific aspect of language 
communication, according to the scientific 
interest of a researcher. In natural language 
processing, lexical entries or semantic attributes 
typically express linguistic knowledge as 
commonsensically understood and used by 
humans. The entries or attributes are entirely 
formatted in some knowledge representation 
and can be manipulated by a computer.  
Where? What are the sources of semantic 
knowledge? Traditionally, individual 
introspection is often a source of obtaining 
word senses. However, individual introspection 
brings about both theoretical and 
implementation problems. Theoretically, it is 
because ―different researchers with different 
theories would observe different things about 
their internal thoughts...‖ (Anderson 1989). 
With regard to implementation, it is because 
consistency becomes a major problem when the 
size of the lexicon or the syntactic tree bank 
exceeds a few thousands entries or annotation 
tags. Despite the scientific interest of such 
experiments, they cannot be extensively 
repeated for the purpose of acquiring mass word 
sense definitions. On-line corpora and 
dictionaries are widely available today and 
provide experimental evidence of word uses and 
word definitions. The major advantage of 
on-line resources is that in principle they 
provide the basis for very large experiments, 
even though at present the methods of analysis 
and application are not fully developed and 
need further research to get satisfactory results.  
How? Semantic computing can be realized 
at various levels. The hard work is to implement 
a system in a real domain, or the more 
conceptual task of defining an effective 
mathematical framework to manipulate the 
objects defined within a linguistic model. Quite 
obviously the ―hows‖ in the literature about 
semantic computing are much more important 
than the ―whats‖ and ―wheres‖. The 
methodology that really works in semantic 
computing is deeply related to the ultimate 
objective of NLP research, which still cannot be 
defined adequately so far.  
3.2 The
Perspectives of Semantic Computing 
from a Macro View 
Why semantic computing (or NLU) has posed 
so great a challenge? We may attribute this to 
two major reasons: First, it is based on the 
knowledge of human language mechanism. If 
fully-developed complicated brains are often 
seen as a crowning achievement of biological 
evolution, the interpersonal communication is 
no simpler than human biological mechanism. 
Language has to be a crucial part of the 
evolutionary process, which has not been fully 
understood by scientific research. Second, in 
NLP research the language is both the target and 
the tool. Current NLP research focuses on either 
speech or written texts only. However, in the 
real world scenario, reading and interaction 
between humans are multi-dimensional 
(through different forms of information such as 
text, speech, or images and utilizing our 
different senses such as vision, hearing). It is 
necessary to rely on the advancements of brain 
science, cognitive science and other related 
fields and work in collaboration to produce 
better results. Linguistics, especially 
computational linguistics, has made its own 
contribution, and semantic computing will play 
an important role in NLP. 
There are complex many-to-many relations 
between the form and the meaning of a 
language. Semantic computing is not only the 
way but also the ultimate goal of natural 
language understanding. Although it is hard, we 
should not give up. Here we propose that the 
main contents of semantic computing include 
the following three aspects: 
 semantic computing on the ontological 
perspective 
 semantic computing on the cognitive 
perspective 
 semantic computing on the pragmatic 
perspective 
As for ontologies, much progress has been 
made worldwide. The remarkable achievements 
in English include: WordNet by Princeton 
University, PropBank by University of 
Pennsylvania, etc. Also there are quite a number 
of efforts made on building ontologies in 
Chinese, which will be elaborated in Section 5.  
In the last few years, the main direction of 
semantic computing is to disambiguate 
language units and constructions. In the 
following Example 2, the word 仪表  yí biǎo  
has two meanings in different contexts. In 
Chinese, word segmentation is also a problem 
that needs to be addressed. In Example 3, 
segmenting the word 白天鹅  bái tiān é  as 白 /
天鹅  or 白天 /鹅  can result in different 
understanding of the sentences. 
 
Example 2 
她的仪表很端庄 。  tā de yí biǎo hěn duān zhuāng  (She has a graceful appearance.) 
她的仪表很精确 。  tā de yí biǎo hěn jīng qué  (Her meters are very accurate.) 
 
Example 3 
白天鹅飞过来了 。 bái tiān é fēi guó lái le (A white swan flies toward us.) 
白天鹅可以看家 。 bái tiān é kě yǐ kān jiā  (A goose can guard our house at daytime.) 
 
As to WSD tasks on the word level, some 
problems can be solved when ontology is 
applied. But ambiguity can also appear on the 
syntactic level. For this, it is usually difficult for 
ontologies to do much, so we may seek help 
from language knowledge bases (See Section 5). 
The following examples of syntactic semantic 
analysis will illustrate how different syntactic 
structures will change the meaning of sentences:  
 
Example 4 
这样的 电影 不是 垃圾 是什么 ?                    --该 电影 是 垃圾 。  
zhé yáng de dián yǐng bú shí lā jī shí shén me ?        -gāi  dián yǐng shí lā jī  
If a movie as such is not rubbish, what is it?          -It is rubbish. 
这样的电影 怎么能说是 垃圾 呢 ?                  -该电影 不是 垃圾 。  
zhé yáng de dián yǐng zěn me néng shuō shí lā jī ne ?   -gāi dián yǐng bú shí lā jī  
How can a movie as such be rubbish?               -It is not rubbish. 
 
 
Example 5 
蚂蚱是蚂蚱 , 蛐蛐是蛐蛐。                -蚂蚱不是蛐蛐 。  
mà zhà shì mà zhà , qū qū shí qū qū        -mà zhà bú shí qū qū   
A grasshopper is a grasshopper, while a cricket is a cricket.  -A grasshopper is not a cricket. 
Rule： A is A, while B is B.  ——〉 A is not B. 
丁是丁 , 卯是卯 。 dīng shí dīng , mǎo shí mǎo   
Ding is ding, while mao is mao.    — being conscientious 
 
With respect to semantic computing on 
cognitive level, we will use metaphor as an 
example. For a long time, NLP research has 
focused on ambiguity resolution. Can NLU be 
realized after ambiguity resolution? Metaphor, 
insinuation, pun, hyperbole (exaggeration), 
humor, personification, as well as intended 
word usage or sentence composing, pose a great 
challenge to NLU research. If the computer can 
deal with metaphors, it will greatly improve the 
ability of natural language understanding. 
First, let’s discuss the rhetorical function of 
a metaphor. Metaphor is extensively and 
skillfully used in the Chinese classic ―Book of 
Songs‖ to boost expressiveness.  
 
Example 6 
Simile:   自伯之东， 首如飞蓬 3；岂无膏沐？谁适为容。          --（卫风 ·伯兮）  
zí bó zhī dōng ， shǒu rú fēi péng ； qǐ wú gáo mú ? shuí shì wéi róng。 -（ wéi fēng  ·bó xī ）  
(Your hair is like disordered grass.)   
Metaphor： 它山之石，可以攻玉 。    --（小雅 ·鹤鸣）  
tā shān zhī shí ， kě yǐ gōng yú 。       --（ xiǎo yǎ · hè míng）  
(Rocks from another mountain can be used to carve jade. Metaphorically this phrase means a  
change of method may solve the current problem.) 
 
                                                 
3 For
the purpose of conciseness, only the underlined parts that contain metaphors are translated. 
Also, many Chinese idioms are 
metaphorical expressions: 同舟共济  tóng zhōu 
gòng jì (Literally, to cross the river in the same 
boat; metaphorically, to work together with one 
heart while in difficulty), 铜墙铁壁  tóng qiáng 
tiě bí  (Literally, walls of brass and iron; 
metaphorically, impregnable). The Chinese 
language makes use of lots of idioms or 
idiomatic expressions that are derived from 
ancient Chinese stories and fables. These 
idioms and idiomatic expressions are often used 
metaphorically and reflect historical and 
cultural background of the language. They are 
the most precious relics to the Chinese language 
and culture. Therefore the Chinese Idiom 
Knowledge Base (CIKB) was also built in 2009. 
CIKB consists of 38,117 entries and describes 
many attributes of Chinese idioms. Among the 
attributes, ―literal translation‖, ―free translation‖ 
and ―English equivalent‖ are very valuable.  
The linguistic function of metaphor is also 
important. Metaphor is the base of new word 
creation and polysemy production (sense 
evolution), for example, 垃圾箱  lā jī xiāng  
(recycle) and 病毒 bìng dú (virus) are used in a 
computer setting and words like 高峰  gāo fēng  
(peak), 瓶颈  píng jǐng (bottleneck) and 线索
xián suǒ  (clue) are endowed with new meanings 
which have not been included in traditional 
Chinese dictionaries. Besides, metaphor creates 
new meanings in sentence level, for instance, in 
地球是人类的母亲 。 dí qiú shí rén léi de mǔ qīn 
(The earth is the mother of humanity.), the word 
母亲  (mother) has a different meaning. So, 
metaphor understanding is beyond the scope of 
ambiguity resolution. Metaphor, linguistics, and 
human cognitive mechanisms are inextricably 
interlinked. So metaphor becomes a fort that 
must be conquered in NLU research.  
From an NLP perspective, metaphors can 
be summarized into the following categories as 
in Table 1. As for the NLP tasks of metaphor 
computing, we can conclude that there are three 
tasks to be accomplished: First, metaphor 
recognition. For instance, how can we 
distinguish 知识的海洋  from 海洋资源考察  
hǎi yáng zī yuán kǎo chá  (investigation of 
ocean resources); Second, metaphor 
understanding and translation. For instance, 知
识的海洋  actually means 知识像海洋一样丰
富 。 zhī shí xiáng hǎi yáng yí yáng fēn g fù 
(Knowledge is as rich as the ocean.). Third, 
metaphor generation. For instance, how phrases 
such as 信息的海洋 xín xī de hǎi yáng  (ocean 
of information) and 鲜花的海洋  xiān huā de 
hǎi yáng  (ocean of flowers) can be generated 
successfully by computer? 
  
Perspective of grammatical 
properties 
Perspective of language unites of  
metaphorical expressions 
Nominal 祖国的花朵 zǔ guó de huā duǒ  
(flower of the country), 生命
的 旅 程 shēng míng de lǚ 
chéng (life journey) 
Word-formation 
level 
卵石 luǎn shí (egg-like stone), 杏仁眼
xíng rén yǎn  (apricot-like eyes) 
Verb 心潮澎湃 xīn cháo péng pái  
(heart wave ), 放飞理想 fàng 
fēi lǐ xiǎng  (let f dream fly) 
Word level 潮流 cháo liú (tide), 朝阳 zhāo yáng  
(morning sun) 
Adjective 这篇文章写得干巴 。 zhé piān 
wén zhāng xiě de gān bā (This 
article is written drily), 这篇
文章清汤寡水 。 zhé piān wén 
zhāng qīng tāng guǎ shuǐ  
(This article is like plain soup 
and water.) 
Phrase level 知识的海洋 zhī shí de hǎi yáng  (ocean 
of knowledge), 播种 幸 福 的 种子 bō 
zhǒng xíng fú de zhǒ ng zi (to sow the 
seeds of happiness) 
Adverb 纯粹胡说 chún cuì hú 
shuō (absolute nonsense) 
Sentence level 汽车喝汽油 。 qí chē hē qí yóu  (Cars 
drink gasoline.), 女人是水 nǚ rén shí 
shuǐ  (A woman is water.) 
  Discourse level 打起黄莺儿，莫叫枝上啼。啼时惊妾梦，
不得到辽西。 dǎ qǐ huáng yīng ér , mò jiào 
zhī sháng tí。 tí shí jīng qiè mèng, bù dé 
dáo liáo xī 。 (To scare away the 
nightingales for their noise has my dream 
in which I went to the west to meet my 
dear husband.) 
 
Table 1.  Categories of metaphors from NLP perspective. 
 
Currently we focus on recognition and 
understanding of metaphors on phrase and 
sentence level. The automatic processing 
methods of metaphors can be summarized as 
two: First, rule (or logic)-based method, i.e., 
finding the conflicts between the target and the 
source, and search their common properties. 
 
Example 7 
这个人是一头狮子 。 zhé gé rén shí yī tóu shī zi (This man is a lion)   
— only the target and the source 
那个人是老狐狸 。 ná gé rén shí lǎo hú li (That man is an old fox.)   
— only the target and the source 
森林里既有勇猛的狮子，也有狡猾的狐狸 。 sēn lí n lǐ jí yǒu yǒng měng de shī zi , yě yǒu jiǎo  
huá de hú li (In the forest, there are both brave lions and sly foxes.)    
--find out properties of the sources 
这个人是勇猛的，那个人是狡猾的 。 zhé gé rén shí yǒng měng de, ná gé rén shí jiǎo huá de  
 (This man is brave, while that man is sly.) 
 
The utterance 河北有个老太太吃土块 。
hé běi yǒu gé lǎo tái tái chī tǔ kuái  (An old lady 
in Hebei eats clay.) is not in conformity with 
common sense, but it is not a metaphor; 
whereas 男人都是动物 。 nán rén dōu shí dóng 
wù (All men are animals.) is logical but it may 
be a metaphor in certain context and may not be 
in another context.  
Second, empirical (statistical) method i.e., 
providing machine with a large number of 
samples and training a model. Yu Shiwen 
presided over the national 973 project 
―Database for text content understanding‖ 
(2004-2009), which includes a subtask named 
―Analysis of Metaphorical Expressions and 
Their Pointed Contents in Chinese Texts‖. In 
this project, various machine learning methods 
have been applied to do semantic analyses from 
the token level. Among them, Wang Zhimin 
completed her doctoral thesis ―Chinese Noun 
Phrase Metaphor Recognition‖ in 2006. Jia 
Yuxiang studied verb metaphor recognition and 
―X is Y‖ type metaphor understanding and 
generation. Qu Weiguang presided over the 
National Natural Science Fund Project 
―Research on Key Technologies in Chinese 
Metaphor Understanding‖ (2008-2010).  
    From a statistical point of view, metaphor 
recognition can be seen as a problem to 
compute the conditional probability p(m|c) to 
decide whether 海洋  is a metaphor in context c. 
The reversed order of two variants m and c will 
not change the value of unified probability of 
p(m|c) and p(c|m),while the relation between 
unified probability and conditional probability 
can be written as:  
 
                                  (1)    
 
Then,                                        
                                  (2)                                                
 
Given c， p(c) is a constant. Then, 
 
                                  (3)                                                     
 
Given a thresholdδ , if             >δ , 
then we can deem this 海洋  is a metaphor.  
Then the problem becomes how to 
compute            . We can compute it 
based on large-scale annotated corpus and get  
 
                            (4)  
 
Nm — the times of 海洋  as a metaphor in the 
corpus; 
N  — the total times of 海洋  in the corpus. 
 
Then we simplify 海洋  and its context c 
into: W-k …  W-1 海洋 W1 …  Wi , where W-k, … , 
W-1, W1,… , Wi represent the n-gram of 海洋  
and its syntactic and semantic attributes 
respectively.  
 
                                   (5) 
 
                                    (6) 
 
N(Ws) stands for the times of 
co-occurrence of 海洋  as a metaphor and word 
W with designated attributes at position. Here 
an important hypothesis of independence is: 
words at different position s is not correlated 
with the word 海洋 . 
Last, we will discuss semantic computing 
on the pragmatic perspective, which is more or 
less unique of Chinese language. First, the 
change of construction in Chinese will affect 
the meaning of a sentence even though the 
words themselves are not changed. The 
emphasized meaning of the construction is not 
equal to the combination of the underlying 
meaning from each element in the construction. 
The meaning reflects the distribution of quantity 
of entities and the relative locations among 
entities. Although the underlying syntactic 
relationship among the main verb, the agent and 
the object(s) still exists, such syntactic 
relationship is only secondary. As in the 
sentence 这张床可以睡三个人 。 zhé zhāng 
chuáng kě yǐ shuí sān gé rén  (This bed can 
sleep three people.) is different in meaning from 
the sentence 三个人可以睡这张床 。 (Three 
people can sleep on this bed.). Second, the 
)|()()|()( mcpmpcmpcp 
)(/)|()()|( cpmcpmpcmp 
)|()()|( mcpmpcmp 
)|()( mcpmp
NNmp m /)( 
)|()|()|()|()|( 11 mWpmWpmWpmWpmcp ik  
),,1,1,,(,/)()|( iksNWNmWp wss   　　
)|()( mcpmp
semantic direction of the complement in 
verb-complement constructions and the 
adverbial phrase in verb-adverbial constructions 
also change the semantic roles of each 
constituent. For instance, （文章）写完了 。
（  wén zhāng ）  xiě wán le ((The article) is 
completed.) or （老师）写累了 。 （  lǎo shī ）  
xiě léi le  ((The teacher) is tired for writing.) or 
香喷喷地炸了一盘花生米 。 xiāng pēn pēn dí 
zhá le yī pán huā shēng mǐ (aromatically fried a 
plate of peanuts). Here the ontology cannot 
provide enough information to reflect the 
process and result of change in semantic roles. 
Thus the Generalized Valence Mode (GVM) is 
proposed to describe not only participants of the 
action, but also the change of participants’ states. 
Third, our ultimate goal will be to achieve 
―semantic harmony‖. For instance, in both 
English and Chinese we can say 拔出来 bá chū 
lái (pull out) or 插进去 chā jín qú  (thrust 
into), but we never say 插出来  (thrust out) or 
拔进去  (pull into). It is alright to say 那个大
苹果他都吃了 。 ná gé dá pín guǒ tā dōu chī le 
(That big apple he eats it all.) , but it is 
awkward to say 那颗小核桃他都吃了 。 ná kē 
xiǎo hé táo tā dōu  chī le  (That small chestnut he 
eats it all.). In fact we can say 那颗小核桃松
鼠都吃了 。 ná kē xiǎo hé táo sōng shǔ dōu chī le  
(That small chestnut the squirrel eats it all.).  
Figure 2. Empirical (statistical) method of metaphor processing. 
 
Professor Lu Jianming (2010) remarked on 
the realization of semantic harmony. The 
principle of semantic constraint of words 
essentially requires that the words in sentences 
should be harmonic in terms of meaning. 
Analysis of ill-formed sentences and automatic 
language generation will benefit from the 
research in semantic harmony. Semantic 
computing on the pragmatic level has unique 
characteristics with respect to Chinese language. 
The solution of these problems poses a great 
challenge and will make great contribution to 
the understanding of the essence and 
universality of languages. 
4 Potential
Applications of Semantic 
Computing – a Case Study on 
Automatic Metaphor Processing in 
Search Engines 
Nowadays, search engines are developing very 
rapidly and some of them have won great 
economic success. In terms of semantic 
computing, Baidu.com takes the lead and has 
unveiled the search concept ―Box computing‖ 
which introduces semantic analysis. The 
precision and recall of a search engine are 
always the essential issue that a user is 
concerned. Therefore we will find the value of 
semantic computing first in a search engine.  
Certainly, if metaphor can be understood 
properly by a computer, the precision of search 
engines will be improved. Let’s take the phrase 
起飞 qǐ  fēi (take off) as an example. Literally 起
飞  means an aircraft takes off such as in 航班
起飞时间  háng bān qǐ fēi shí jiān (the time for 
the airplane to take off). Sometimes we also use 
it in phrases like 经济起飞 jīng jí qǐ fēi  
(economic take-off) or 东方美女歌坛起飞  
dōng fāng  měi nǚ gē tán qǐ fēi  (Oriental 
beauties take off in the music arena.) to mean 
metaphorically. If the literal sense and its 
metaphorical sense can be distinguished 
successfully, we will find the exact information 
that we need. Meanwhile, we hope that through 
this the recall of search engine will also be 
improved. For example, in Chinese we often 
use the phrase 祖国的花朵 zǔ guó de huā duǒ  
(flowers of the country) metaphorically to refer 
to 儿童 ér tong (children). So web pages 
describing 祖国的花朵  should also be related 
to the query word 儿童 . 
We also observe that the phrases 金融风暴  
jīn róng fēng báo (financial storm) and 金融海
啸  jīn róng hǎi xiáo (financial tsunami) 
metaphorically refer to 金融危机 jīn róng wēi 
jī  (financial crisis). But when we input the 
query 金融危机  into a search engine, the 
results were only web pages with 金融危机  or 
金融 //危机 . But when we use the query 金融风
暴  or 金融海啸 , there were no web pages with 
the results 金融危机 . We know that the phrase 
炒鱿鱼  chǎo yóu yú  has literal usage (to fry 
squids) and metaphorical usage (to fire sb. from 
his/her job). When we input the phrase into the 
search engine, we find the result with 
metaphorical usage takes up 65% while other 
usage only accounts for 35% (Wang, 2006). 
Therefore we may conclude that whether 
metaphor is understood will seriously affect 
precision and recall. 
Another important application lies in 
machine translation and cross-lingual search. 
Correct metaphor recognition and 
understanding is the precondition of correct 
translation. Machine translation can be a 
framework to evaluate the performance of 
metaphor recognition and understanding, and 
also is a tool to realize cross-lingual search. For 
instance, a well-known Chinese female 
volleyball player got a nickname as 铁榔头 tiě 
láng tou. Shall we translate it literally as ―iron 
hammer‖ or more metaphorically as ―iron fist‖ 
in order to let a user of search engine have a 
better sense of what it actually means? 
Translation is culture-bound. When we see the 
sentence 该电影是鸡肋 。 gāi dián yǐng shí jī léi , 
how should we translate the word 鸡肋  (a 
chicken’s rib) here? And how shall we 
distinguish its literal meaning with its 
metaphorical meaning (食之无味弃之可惜 。 shí 
zhī wú wéi qí zhī kě xī,  tasteless to eat but a 
waste to cast away) in order to understand better 
the sentence ―The movie is a chicken’s rib‖? 
Therefore when we investigate the 
feasibility analysis of applications of automatic 
metaphor recognition, we propose there are still 
three solutions to the above-mentioned 
problems: 
 To overcome the limitedness of source 
domain words 
 To recognize metaphors in web pages 
and build metaphor indexes. Offline 
processing often makes good use of the 
advantages of a search engine. 
 Before realizing query understanding, 
let users choose metaphorical or literal 
meaning of the query through 
human-computer interaction. 
5 Language
Knowledge Bases as the 
Foundation of Semantic Computing 
As the foundation of semantic computing, 
language knowledge bases are in great demand. 
The achievements on language knowledge 
bases for Chinese-centered multilingual 
information processing include: Chinese LDC, 
Comprehensive Language Knowledge Base 
(CLKB) by ICL at Peking University, HowNet 
by Zhendong Dong, Chinese Dependency Tree 
Bank by Harbin Institute of Technology, etc. 
Language knowledge base is an 
indispensable component for NLP system, and 
its quality and scale determines the failure or 
success of the system to a great extent. For the 
past two decades, a number of important 
language knowledge bases have been built 
through the effort of people in Institute of 
Computational Linguistics (ICL) at Peking 
University. Among them, the Grammatical 
Knowledge Base of Contemporary Chinese 
(GKB) (Yu et al., 2000) is the most influential.   
Based on GKB, various research projects 
have been initiated. For instance, a project on 
the quantitative analysis of ―numeral-noun‖ 
construction of Chinese was conducted by 
Wang (2009) to further analyze the attributes of 
Chinese words. A project aiming at the emotion 
prediction of entries in CIKB was completed by 
Wang (2010) to further understand how the 
compositional elements of a fossilized construct 
like an idiom function from the token level. 
Offset Synset Csyncet Hypernym Hyponym Definition Cdefinition 
07632177 teacher  
instructor  
 
教师   
教员   
老师   
先生  
导师  
老板   
孩子王   
臭老九  
…  
07235322  
 
07086332 
07162304 
07209465 
07243767 
07279659 
07297622 
07341176 
07401098 
…  
a person 
whose 
occupation 
is teaching  
 
以教学为职
业的人   
 
 
Offset Synset Csyncet Hypernym Hyponym Definition Cdefinition 
07331418  husband 
hubby 
married_
man  
  
 
丈夫  
先生   
夫君   
夫婿   
爱人   
老公   
郎君   
驸马   
驸马爷   
…  
07391044  
 
071094820
719596807
255726073
28008  
 
a married 
man;  
a woman's 
partner in 
marriage  
 
已婚男子；   
婚姻中女性
一方的伴侣   
 
Offset Synset Csyncet Hypernym Hyponym Definition Cdefinition 
07414666  
 
Mister  
Mr.  
 
先生  
师傅   
同志   
大哥   
老兄   
老弟   
07391044  
 
 
 a form of 
address for 
a man 
 
对男子的一
种称呼   
  
 
 
Table 2. The Synset of the word 教师 jiáo shī and its related Synsets. 
 
Following GKB, language knowledge bases 
of large scale, high quality and various type 
(words and texts, syntactic and semantics, 
multi-lingual) have been built, such as the 
Chinese Semantic Dictionary (CSD) for 
Chinese-English machine translation, the 
Chinese Concept Dictionary (CCD) for 
cross-language text processing, the multi-level 
Annotated Corpus of Contemporary Chinese, 
etc. The projects as a whole won the Science 
and Technology Progress Award issued by 
Ministry of Education of China in 2007.  
As mentioned in Section 3, the word 病毒  
(virus) has two senses in both English and 
Chinese: one is in biology and the other is in 
computer science. When we want to do 
cross-lingual information retrieval, the two 
senses need to be distinguished. Hence, CCD 
can serve as a useful tool to complete the task 
for it organizes semantic knowledge from a 
different angle. Concepts in CCD are 
represented by Synsets, i.e. sets of synonyms as 
in Table 2. For instance, the concept 教师  is in 
a Synset {教师  教员  老师  先生  导师  老板  
孩子王  臭老九  …} and all the concepts form 
a network to associate the various semantic 
relations between or among the concepts: 
hypernym-hyponym, part-whole, antonym, 
cause and entailment, by which we can retrieve 
information in either an extensive or a 
contractive way so as to improve the precision 
or recall of a search engine. It can also provide 
support for WSD tasks. 
In 2009, the various knowledge bases built 
by ICL were integrated into the CLKB. The 
integration of heterogeneous knowledge bases 
is realized by a resolution of ―a pivot of word 
sense‖. Three basic and important knowledge 
bases, GKB, CSD and CCD have been 
integrated into a unified system which includes 
language processing module, knowledge 
retrieval module and knowledge exploration 
module. 
Although there are some fundamental 
resources on semantic computing, it needs 
further improvement, updating, integration and 
specification to form a collective platform to 
perform more complicated NLP tasks. To 
further improve the result of semantic 
computing, innovative projects for new tasks 
should also be launched, for instance:  
 metaphor knowledge base 
 ultra-ontology dynamic knowledge 
base (generalized valence mode) 
 the integration of information based 
on multi-lingual translation  
6 Concluding
Remarks 
Why semantics is so useful in the first place? 
Linguists and psychologists are interested in the 
study of word senses to shed light on important 
aspects of human communication, such as 
concept formation and language use. 
Lexicographers need computational aids to 
analyze in a more compact and extensive way 
word definitions in dictionaries. Computer 
scientists need semantics for the purpose of 
natural language processing and understanding. 
Therefore, the significance of semantic 
computing in NLP is obvious and more research 
needs to be done with this respect. 
All in all, we may conclude that the 
methods of semantic computing can be 
summarized as the following:  
 The research of applicable language 
model    
 The research of effective algorithms   
 To build language knowledge bases as 
its foundation   
Semantic computing is a long-term 
research subject. We hope more progress can be 
made if a clearer view can be provided for the 
direction of its development and the pavement 
for future research can be constructed more 
solidly with more work done.  
Acknowledgements 
Our work is based on the long-term 
accumulation of the language resources that 
have been built by the colleagues of ICL and it 
is their contributions that make our achievement 
possible today. Parts of the content in this paper 
were presented by Shiwen Yu on the 
conferences in Hangzhou (International 
Workshop on Connected Multimedia 2009) and 
Suzhou (the 11th Chinese Lexical Semantics 
Workshop 2010), and many thanks should be 
given to those who offered valuable thoughts 
and advice. The authors also want to extend 
their gratitude toward CIPS-Sighan for this 
valuable opportunity to demonstrate our 
viewpoints and work. 
References 
Anderson, J. R. 1989.  A Theory of the Origins 
of Human Knowledge. Artificial 
Intelligence. 40(1-3): 313-351. 
Carreras, X. and Marques L. 2004. Introduction 
to the CoNLL-2004 Shared Task: Semantic 
Role Labeling. Proceedings of the CoNLL 
2004: 89-97. 
Dagan, I. et al. 1993. Contextual Word 
Similarity and Estimation from Sparse 
Data. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual 
Meeting on the Association for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL):164-171 
Fillmore, C. J.. 1976. Frame Semantics and the 
Nature of Language. In Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences: Conference on 
the Origin and Development of Language 
and Speech:20-32 
Gale, William A., Kenneth W. Church, and 
David Yarowsky. 1993. A Method for 
Disambiguation Word Senses in a Large 
Corpus. Computers and the Humanities. 
26(5-6): 415-439  
Gildea, Denial and Denial Jurafsky. 2002. 
Automatic Labeling of Semantic Roles. 
Computational Linguistics, 28(3): 
245-288. 
Hasida, K. 2007. Semantic Authoring and 
Semantic Computing. Sakurai, A. et al. 
(Eds.): JSAI 2003/2004, LNAI 3609, 
137–149. 
Ide, Nancy and Jean Véronis. 1998. 
Introduction to the Special Issue on Word 
Sense Disambiguation: The State of the Art, 
Computational Linguistics, 24(1) : 2-40. 
Jin, Peng, Wu Yunfang, Yu Shiwen. 
SemEval-2007 Task 05: Multilingual 
Chinese-English Lexical Sample. In 
Proceedings of SemEval-2007: 19-23. 
Johansson, Richard and Pierre Nugues. 2008. 
Dependency-based Syntactic-semantic 
Analysis with PropBank and NomBank. In 
Proceedings of the Twelfth Conference on 
Computational Natural Language 
Learning: 183-187. 
Lee, Lillian. Similarity-Based Approaches to 
Natural Language Processing. Ph.D. thesis. 
Harvard University. 
Lesk, Michal. 1986. Automatic Sense 
Disambiguation: How to Tell a Pine from 
an Ice Cream Cone. In Proceedings of the 
5th Annual International Conference on 
Systems Documentation: 24-26. 
Li, Sujian, Zhang Jian, Huang Xiong and Bai 
Shuo. 2002. Semantic Computation in 
Chinese Question-Answering System, 
Journal of Computer Science and 
Technology, 17(6) : 993-999. 
Lu, Jianming. 2010. Foundations of Rhetoric -
The Law of Semantic Harmony. Rhetoric 
Learning, 2010(1): 13-20. 
Qu, Weiguang, Sui Zhifang, et al. 2007. A 
Collocation-based WSD Model: 
RFR-SUM. In Proceedings of the 20th 
International Conference on Industrial, 
Engineering, and Other Applications of 
Applied Intelligent Systems:23-32. 
Schutze, Hinrich. 1998. Automatic Word Sense 
Discrimination. Computational Linguistics, 
24(1):97-124. 
Resnik, Philip. 1999. Semantic Similarity in a 
Taxonomy: An Information-Based 
Measure and its Application to Problems of 
Ambiguity in Natural Language, Journal 
of Artificial Intelligence Research 11 : 
95-130. 
Wang, Lei and Yu Shiwen. Forthcoming 2010. 
Construction of Chinese Idiom Knowledge 
Base and Its Applications. In Proceedings 
of Coling 2010 Multi-word Expressions 
Workshop. 
Wang, Meng et al. 2009. Quantitative Research 
on Grammatical Characteristics of Noun in 
Contemporary Chinese. Journal of Chinese 
Information Processing, 22(5): 22-29. 
Wang, Zhiming. 2006. Recent Developments in 
Computational Approach to Metaphor 
Research. Journal of Chinese Information 
Processing, 20(4): 16-24. 
Xue, Nianwen and Martha Palmer. 2005. 
Automatic Semantic Role Labeling for 
Chinese Verbs. In Proceedings of the 19th 
International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence:1160-1165 
Yu, Shiwen et al.. 2003. Introduction to 
Grammatical Knowledge Base of 
Contemporary Chinese (Second Edition) 
(in Chinese), Tsinghua University Press, 
Beijing, China.  

