Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Cross Lingual Information Access at COLING 2010, pages 79–87,
Beijing, August 2010
Multiinguization and Personalization of NL-based Systems 
Najeh Hajlaoui 
GETALP, LIG, UJF
385 rue de la Bibliothèque, BP n° 53 
38041 Grenoble, cdex 9, France
Najeh.Hajlaoui@imag.fr
Christian Boitet 
GETALP, LIG, UJF
385 rue de la Bibliothèque, BP n° 53 
38041 Grenoble, cdex 9, France
Christian.Boitet@imag.fr
 
Abstract 
Linguistic porting of cone mage-
ment servies processing spotaneous t-
terancesin natural languag h become 
important. Inmost ituations, ch tter-
ances are noisy, but are costrained by 
the situation,thus constituting a restricted 
sublangage. In prevous papers, we have 
presented thr mthods t port such sys-
tems toother languages. In thispaper, e 
study how to also personalize them by 
making hem capable of automatic per-
ception adaptation, usn fz evalu-
ation functions. We have reengineered 
IMRS, a music retrieval NL-based sys-
temto implement that idea, and ported it 
 French, English and Arabic using an 
enhanced version of our external porting 
method, building a unique conte extrac-
tor fothese three languages. Mre than 
30 persons participated in a plimy
on-line qualtatve evaluation of the sys-
tem.  
1 Introduction

Multigalizng systems handling content ex-
pressed n spontaneous natural language is an 
important but difficult problem, and very few 
multilngual services ar vailable today. The
choice of a particular multilingualization process 
depends on the translational situation: types and 
levels ofpsible accesses, available resources, 
and linguistic competences of participants in-
volved in the multilngualization task. Three 
main straegis are possible n princple for 
multlngualization, by transltio, and byinter-
nal or external adaptation.  We consider here the 
subproblem of linguistic porting, wher th con-
tent is adapted toanother language, butnotne-
cessarily to a different cultural environment. We 
also try add some level of personalizaton, by 
automatic perception adaptation, based o th
use of fuzzy evaluatfunctons. We use the 
example IMRS, an Impression-based Music-
Retrieval System (Kuamoto, 2004), with a na-
tive interface in Japanese, which e have reengi-
neered and ported to French, English and Arabic.   
The context and objectivs ofur ork ae pre-
sented in the second section. The third section 
presents t IMRS orgnal prototype and the 
possible strategies to achieve porting person-
alization. In the fourth section, we give detailed 
specifications of our reengineered music retrieval 
system, IMRS-g. In the fifth section, e present 
the implementation o ive music retrieval 
modes. Finaly, wereport on the mltingual 
porting of this system. 
2 Method
for porting NL-based con-
tent procesig systems 
The coic fa mthod fr multilingualizing e-
commerce services based on content extraction
from spontaneous texts depends on two aspects 
of the translational situation: 
• The levl of ces toresources ofthe initial 
application. Four cases are possible: complete 
access to the source code, access limited to 
the internal representation, access 
dictionary, and o cess. In the case of 
IMRS, the access was limited to internal 
representation, visible a non-linguistic 
interface in the orginal prototype (a set of 10 
impressionmanipulate by a set of 7 check-
box).  
• Thelinguistic qalifiction level of th pr-
sons involved in the process (levelof know-
79
ledge of the source language, competence in 
NLP)andthe rrces (orpa, dictionaries) 
available for the newlanguage(s), n particu-
lar for the sublanguages at hand. 
We cnetra o NLP-based systems that 
perform specific tasks in restricted domains. 
Figure 1 shows t genral strucre of thes sys-
tems. Examples fuch applications and ervices 
are: catgorization of various docments such as 
AFP (Agenc France Prse) flash repots rcus-
tomer ssages an ASS (After Sale Service) 
server, and information extraction to feed or con-
sult a database (e.g. classified ads, FAQ, auto-
maed hotlines). 
 
Figure 1: general structure of an NLP-based CMS 
Wefirst udied linguistic porting of e-
commerce systems handling spontaneous utter-
ances in natural languages, that are often noisy, 
but constrained by the situation, and constie a 
moreor lss resticd sub-languae (Krdg,
1982), (Harris, 1968) (Grishman and itredge, 
1986). 
Thiskind ofsytem use aspecific ontet 
representation on which the functional kernel 
wors. Inmost caes, thi cont rstatio 
is generatedfrothe natve lgu L1 by a
content extractor. In our PhD, we have identified 
three posible methods flinistic porting, and 
have ilustrated them by porting to French CATS 
(Daoud, 2006), a Classified Ads Transaction 
System inSM (Arabic) deployed in mman on 
Fastlink,as welas IRS, mentoned above. The 
three posible strategiesfor linguistic portingare 
internal rting, external prtin and  by
machine translation. Figure 2 shws an examle 
of the car domain with he output of the cotent 
extractor (CRL-CATS). 
In CCATS (Content Representation Lan-
guage for CATS), a posted SMS is represented 
as a set of binary relations between objects. It is 
kind semantic graph with a UNL-like syntax
(Uchida and Zhu 2005-2006). There are no vari-
ables, but the dictionary is used as a type lattice 
allowing specialization and generalization. 
 
;Selling Renault Megane m 2000
[S] 
sal(saloon:00,sale:00)
mak(saloon:00,RENAULT(country<France, 
county<europe):07) 
mod(saloon:00,Megane(country<France,
country <europe,make<RENAULT):0C)
yea(saloon:00,2000:0K)
[/S] 
Figure 2: Example of SMS 
2.1 Internal
porting 
The first posibility consists inadpting the ori-
ginalcontent extractor of the aplicaton from L1 
to the target language L2 ( Figure 3); but that 
is viable only if :
• the developersree to open their code an 
tools,  
 the coe and tools are relatively easy toun-
derstand, 
• the resources are nt too heavy to create (in 
particular the dictionary). 
That methd requirs fcurse traing the lo-
calization team with the tools and methods used.
Undr ths conits, adption ca b 
done ata very reasonable cost, and further main-
tenance. 
 
Figure 3: internal porting 
We have priously xperimentedhis method 
(Hajlaoui, 2008) b prting CATS frm Arabic t
French: for that, we adapted its native Arabic 
content extractor, ritten in EnCo
1
 (Uchida and 
Zhu 1999), by translating its dictionary, 
modifying a few nalysis rules. 
                                                 
1
 EnCo is a tool based on rules and dictionaries ued 
for content extraction n original version of CATS
system.
80
2.2 External
porting 
If there is access only to the internal content rep-
resentation, the solution consists in adapting an
available content extractor for L2 to the sublan-
guage at hand, and to compile its results into the 
original content representation (see Figure 4).
For acompany wantng to offer multilnguali-
zation services, it would indeed be an ideal situa-
tion tohave a generic content extractor, and to
adapt it to each situation (laguage, sublanguage, 
domain, content represetatio, task, other con-
straints).  However, there is still n wn ge-
neric ent extractor ofthat per, andot 
even a generic content extractor for articular 
languages, so that this approach cannot be con-
sidered at present. Our aproch istentadpt 
an existing content et, dvlp fr L2
and a different domain/ask, orfor another ln-
guage and the same domaitask. 
We also plied this mehod tport CATS 
from Arabic to French,and experimentation are 
described in (Hajlaoui, 2008). 
 
Figure 4: external porting 
2.3 Porting
by machine trnslatio 
If there is no access to the code, dictionary, and 
internal content representation of the original 
applicatio, the oly psible approach o portit
from L1 to L2 is to develop an MT system o 
automatically translate its (spontaneous) inputs 
frL2 into L1 (see Figure 5).   
Portng CATS from ArabictoFrench bystat-
istical translation gave a very god performance, 
and that with a very small training corpus (less 
than 10 ords). This proes that, in the case 
of very smallsub-languag, statistical transla-
tion may be f suficient qalitytarting from a 
corpus 100 to 500 smaller than for the general 
laguage. 
 
Figure 5: porting by machine translatio 
2.4 Result
and evluation  
We tranlted manualy the valution crpus 
used for he evaluation of CATS Arabic vesion. 
It contains 200 real SM (100 S to buy + 100 
SMS to sale) posted by realusers in Jordan. 
We spnt289 mn to ranslate the 200 rabic 
S (2082 words is quivalent to 10 
words/SMS, aproximately 8standrpges
2
) 
into a Frenchtranslation, or about 35 mn per 
page, and 10 mn p standard page to pass from 
raw translatio to fuctioal translation.  
We obtaied 20 French SMS cosider to
be functonal(1361 words, or about6,8 
words/SMS, pproximately 5 standard pages). 
 then computed the recall R, the precision P 
and the F-measure F for each most mportant 
property (action “sale or buy”, “make”, “model”, 
“year”, “price”). 
P = |correct entities identified by the system| / 
|entities identified by the system|;  
R = |correct entities identified by the | / 
|entities identified by the human|;  
F-measure = 2PR/(P+R) 
Table 1sumarizesthe prcentag (F-
asure ratio) of the Arbic-Frnch porting of 
CATS nd shows deils n (Hajlaoui, 2008). 
Propertis having numberavalues, like price 
and year, lower the percentage of porting by x-
ternal porting, but advantage is that method 
requires only accessing the internal representa-
tion of the application. 
 Miimu Averag Maxiu 
Internal porting 95%98%100%
External por46% 77% 99% 
Porting by stais-
tical tranltio 
85%93%98%
Table 1: evaluation ofthree methods ue for 
porting CATS_Cars from Arabic to French. 
                                                 
2
 Standard pge = 250 words 
81
In the third part of this article, we describe the 
multilnguization of IMRS, IRS-g, hich in-
cludes a module queries management, where 
the queries are expressed either in a natural la
guage or in a graphical interface showing 10 vec-
tors corresponding tothe intenal content repre-
sentation. In response to a query, the user r
ceives a set of music pieces that correspond to 
her/his desired selection criteria.  
In addition to the original design, where the 
NL exprsion f the 10measure ar maped 
ina fixed waytothe integers inthe real interval 
[1, 7], e have tried to apply a small part of the 
theory ofuzzy sets toimprove the representa-
tion and evaluation of human perceptions. 
3 Mltiinguization
of IMRS 
To prt IRS tosevral languaes, w used th 
external porting method and e built a newcon-
tent extractor, which treats simple tterances re-
lated to the music doain.
3.1 IMRS

 (Kumamoto and Ohta, 2003) is a non-
deployed Web service prototype, developed as 
an experimental base for a PhD. It allows to re-
trieve music pieces either by using Japanese 
queries, or by manipulating a graphicalinterface 
with 10critea stble knos (pd, noise, 
rhythm...), and showing remarkable values (inte-
gers between 1 7) expressed by English la-
bels. In IMRS, an utterance processed the sys-
tem isa spontaneos entenr fragment of a 
sentence. The contentxtractotransorms it into
a vector of 10 real numbers in the interval[1, 7]. 
The symbol ni means don’t care.  
 10 cponts are clledNoisy-Quiet, 
Cal-Agitated, Bight-Dak, Refrshng-
Depresin, SlemnFlippnt, Lisuly
Rtricte, Prtty-unattractive, Happy-Sad, e-
laxed-Aroused, Th mind is retordThe mind is 
vulnerable. Eac s aciate gaes(inter-
preted as "concepts" below). For example, the 
component Hapy-Sad i chrterized by the 
seven grades: very happy, happy, a little happy, 
medium, alite ad, s and very sad. In the ori-
ginal IMRS, hese values always correspond to 
the integers inthe [1, 7] interval, respectively 
7.0, 6.0, 5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0 and 1.0.  
A requst ofind apiec of music tha gives a
happy impression (happy) corresponds o the 10-
dimensional vector as flw: (nil nil nil 
nil l 6.0 nill) (Kumamoto,2007), butthe 
musicpies can be described by vectors having 
non-integer components.  
Althoug we hd quiteprise dripton f 
the internal represtation edbyIMRS. We 
could not find information the rest of the sys-
tem. Hence, we recreated it to emulate the func-
tions described inthe original pblicatios. That 
incluthe sytem architecture, the desig and 
implementation fthe database, the management
of requests, and the programming of actually 
much more than he riginally proposed service. 
By definiion,linguistic rting cnit i
making an pplcation existing in some laguage 
L1 vilable innothr lanae L2, within the 
same context. Evaluatiof the linguistic porting 
of a ent management applcation can be done 
at two levels. 
• Evalution at the internal repsntatio 
level. It is an evaluation at the level of com-
ponents.  
• Evalutionat the task level. It is aend-to
end elutio of th nw vrion ( L2) of 
the appcation.   
To make a ed-toend evaluation of IMRS, 
an IMRS Web-based simulator was devloped. It 
makesit posible toevalute incontext th result 
of linguistic porting (Japnese ! Frh, Aabic, 
English). A real dtabs with eal music pieces, 
characterized by 10-dimensionalvectors as in 
IMRS, was also created.  
The aim ofthe multilinguization was hoever 
notto develop an applicaton strictly equivalent 
to IMS, with the addition ofbeing able to an-
dle queries expressed i Frec, Ei and
Arabic, ut oevlp a upward omptble, 
extended aplicatn. I prtilar, we to
add other dimsions coresponing tothe type 
of music, the composer, the period ofcomo-
sition, tinstruments used, etc. We also wanted 
to experiment the possibility o associate to each 
impressiouchas happy a fuzy se ovr [1,7] 
expressed by a membership function (into [0,1]). 
More dtails re givn below. 
3.2 Our
IMRS-g system 
With e lp ofa Master tudent icomputer 
science, Xiang Yin, we have programmed in 
82
PHP/MySQL a Web service ald IMRS-g, re-
implementingasaccuratelyasposible the sys-
tem IMRS, and generalizing it. 
Not havin sufficient xertis inJapnes, 
wereplaced Japanese by Frnch.We also d-
apted the NLP part to English and Arabic, using 
the same strategy to handle the three languages. 
We then geraliz the intral repsta-
tionbyaddin other searchcriteria (such asthe 
type of music, e compoer, the eriodofcom-
position, and the instruments used), and using 
fuzzy sets. 
A large st of music pes wa loaded into the 
database, and labelled by vectors in a collabor-
ative way. An evaluation of the French version 
was then codute asprt of a relistc ue, with 
students listening to music.
T first part f th linguistic prting has bn 
very rapid, since itconsisted only in translating 
into French and Arabic the NL labels expressi
impression(Noisy/Quiet,Calm/Agitated, 
Sad/Happy, etc.), by asociing them the same 
values as in IMRS. 
The contet extrator pes imple utter-
ances and extracts fromthem a 10-dimensional 
IMRS vector, and the additional information in 
the form (lists of) o items. 
As inIMRS, arequtfora music pie can 
be made either by tping a qey in naturl ln-
guage, or hrough a graphical interface lowing 
to manipulate 10-dimensionalvector, and to fil
fields for the other types of information.  
In response, the user receives a list oflinks to 
music pies corresponding to is selctio cri-
teria. Clicking ona link starts the playing fthe 
corresponding music piece.
3.3 Generalization
by fuzzying the interpre-
tation of the NL labels  
The original repsntatio ofIMRS sem too 
rigid to express utterances like quite cal or t
change the current request using an uterance like 
a lite slower. Even if we agree that each term 
corresponds to an interval of length 1 centred on 
its reference value, e.g. [5.5, 6[ for happy, [6.5, 
7.5] for very happy, etc., there are problems at 
the extremities. Therefore we studied the possi-
bility of better modelling and better processing 
the requests by usin fuzzy loic (Zadeh, 1965). 
In order to reason from imperfect knowlede, 
in contrast to classical logic, fuzzy logic pro-
poses to replace the Bolean vriables used in 
classical logic by fuzzy variables, and the classi-
cal crisp sets by fuzzy sets.  
Let Ube aunivers ofelmnts. A fuzy set A 
over is defined by its membership function
(f
A
). n element x of Uis in  with a dgree of 
membership f
A
(x)"[0,1]. If f
A
(x) "{0, 1}, A 
reduces to a classic set, here A if f(x)=1 
and x #A if f
A
(x)=0 (f
A
 is then simply the car-
acteristic functio o A).  
In a fuzzy set, an element x ore or less be-
longs tothe cocept associated toA, or to the 
concept attached to A (such as happy). fuzzy 
set is defined by allvalues of its membership 
functon its definition domain (which may be 
discrete or continuous). 
For example, the concept young might be de-
fined over the universe U of possible (ntger) 
ages U =[0, 120] by the discrete fuzzy set A = 
((10 1), (20 0.8), (30 0.6), (40 0.2), (50, 0.1), (60 
0), (70 0), (80 0)). The first pair means tht a 10-
year old is 100% young, and th fift tht a 5
year old i10% young.  
Using fuzy logic,weould say that a piece of 
musics 100% rapid ift te i 10 (1
crotchets (quarter notes) per minute), with a bell-
shaped curve for the membership function, rising 
from 0 to 1 and hen falling, in the range [84, 
112]. Then, rapid mght be undso a im-
pression of dity. As the impression ofra-
pidity may ffer from person to person, that 
curve may differ accordingly. 
 
 
Figure 6. Rpresntatio of the rapidity impression  
Wero toicrpot h oibltyo
move from the perceptions t dgt masure-
ments and to personalze the system by lerning 
parameters of each curve of this type for each 
user. Such a curve can be characterized by a 
small number of significant points, such as the 
maximum, 2 points at he10% below the maxi-
 minima on ech side, and 2 points at 
10% above the global minimum.
 
rapide 
 
0  40 60 84 100 112 140 160 176 
1 
 
0
83
To find the criteia for each piee ofmusic, we 
have developed a website o ask a group of peo-
ple to listen to music pieces and to give their 
opinions n erms of impressions, knoing that 
they will not have thsame taste and the same 
perception. For example, for the same piece, a 
first lener wil say that its rapid, and a second 
wifinditveryapid.Thequstionher ishow 
to merge these ifferent view nto a single m-
pression. Wpropose two solutions: (1) con-
struct a fuzzy set hich is he average of those of 
annotators, possibly by giving greater weight to 
the annotations of confirmed antators, (2) 
build severalperception types, i.e. several fuzzy 
sets corresponding to subgroups of users ith 
similar perceptions. We know that the Japanese 
persons find only slow pieces of music hat Wes-
terners find very slow.
In this work, e have taken into account pre-
vious queries of users or the history of users. For 
example, if a user requests a piece a lite less 
noisy, or a litle more calm, we should be able to 
use the information saved in his story, and cal-
culate the new request taking to account the 
perceptions associated to he lastpiece of music 
listened to.  
4 Specifiation
and implementation 
We specified and implemented a multimedia 
database for storing music pieces, as well as in-
formation representithe impressions of each 
piece. As said bove, w added to the 10 features 
of IMRS oth informationtypes:  singer, poet, 
composer, genre, album and duration, for each 
music pie. Moreovr,toevalute music, we 
stored the values of the impressions rcorded by 
contributing users for each piece. These values 
were usd t pruce the final values stored in 
the atabase. To analyze the impressions of 
users, we requested further information from 
each user, as gender and age. 
We loaded our database with a set of 354 
pieces (89 Western, 265 Eastern) and allinfor-
mation relat t ech pie (rt, abum, 
genre...). The duration of ndividual pieces varies 
between 48 seconds and 22 minutes.
The bsite has login pae that llows ae-
cured access for each user. For a first connection, 
the user must register and fill some information 
from which we compute and stora profile. 
If the connection is sucesfl, a list of pieces 
isdisplayed. For each piece, a ink allows listen-
ing tothe music and also pens new page ro-
viding an adapted evaluation interface aoi-
ate to the evaluation task.  
In the evaluation phase, the user can listen to 
the selected piece and evalute i acording tohe 
10 IMRS
basic criteria (soft, calm, happy...). For 
each criterion, we offer range of values and the 
user can move a cursor and put it on the value 
that represents itspercetion. Next, we proose 
several ways to search for music pieces. 
The cost f multilinguizatio oftheIMRS sys-
temwas3an-months. To this cost, weadd 1 
man-month for the development and intgrtion 
task ofthe content extractor for the ree lan-
guages (French, Arabic, English). 
5 Music
retrival modes 
After gitring ad contig, user listen to
and evaluate music. The evaluation infomatio
is recorded directly in the database.  
For each dimension, we compute the average 
of the obtained values. This phase is tporary 
pending further evaluatios todraw the curves 
associated to each dimension and to each piece.
We efind a implement five posiblties 
to searchmusic: byuser profile, by impressions, 
by selecting criteria, by input utterances, and by 
history. 
5.1 Search
by user profile 
We prose touse music adpt toheir pe-
ferences ecorded in theirprofiles.The method 
follows the following steps:  
• Find he user profile (tn values that represent 
his basic impressions) in the database.  
 Compute t Euclidean distance betwen the 
two vectorsformed bythe 10 valuesof profile 
and the 10 values of each music piece (see ex-
ample below).  
•Sort piecs by distances in ascending order.  
Viw he nearest 10 pieces.  
Her isan xmpl: 
Usepofile:iresionvector 
Profil =(Nil 6  3 Nil 2  1  3  5 Nil Nil)  
Piecimpressions (existing mpressions vector):  
1 
(3.5 Nil 2.3 5.0 3.2 Nil 2.6 Nil 6.0  1.4) 
 
84
Euclidian distace (d):  
d= 
()(()()
22222
4.165.341.53.46. !+!+!+
 
=> d = 5.3,  
Note: if value= “Nil”, we put vale :=. 
5.2 Search
by impressions 
We ask the usr toplac the curso n the 
values hatrepresenthis perception. We can limi
ourselves to a particular type of music (Western 
music, Eastern music or light c). The search 
method has the following steps:
• Choose kind of music (Western music, 
Eastern music or light music). 
 Plce one ormore cursors on the values tha 
represent user’s perception.  
• Comput the Euclidean distance between the 
two vectorsformed bythe 10 valuesof search 
and the 10 values of each piece.
• Sort piecs by distances in ascending order. 
Viw h narest 10pcs. 
Her isxmpl: werh noisy (fort) 
and somewhat calm(assez calme) piece see 
Figure 7).  
 
Figure 7. Example ofsearch by impresion
 
Thrsult of the rvious reqst is ast of 10
music pies.
5.3 Search
by selection ritea  
We ofer ur sarh rita: tis, album, genre 
and creation date. The search methods for each 
of these criteria are similar.  
For example, the search by artist follows the 
following steps: 
• Search l artists (singers) existing in t 
database. 
 Choose n rtist from this list. 
•Search lpiecs performed by this artist and 
show them (by links). 
5.4 Search
by input utterancs  
The contet extractor woks f French, Arabic 
and English, and handles simple utterances e-
lated tothe music dain. This program takes as
input a corp ofsic piecesand ives as out-
put file containing the corresponding vector 
representatios.  
The sarch method has the following steps:  
• Ete utteranc inntural lanuae re-
senting impressions of music search. 
 Cal acontent xtrator. The rsult, which 
contains a vector representing the desired per-
ceptions, is stored in a text file.  
• Extract the vctor fom the text file.  
For h value of the vector (Vv),if one of 
the symbols(+, +, ---,¬) appears, then we 
extract the value of the last search of the con-
cerned user (Vo: old value) from the database 
to copute the newvalue of search (Vn: ew 
value).  
Here asome examples f uterancs tha cor-
respond to the precedent symbols. +: more noisy, 
+: still mr nisy, -: less noisy, --: still less 
noisy, ¬: not noisy.  
We trea thse mbolswith e folwing rules: 
If (V
v
 == ‘+’){V
n
 =  +$ ;}
+ 
o
 2 
If (
v
 = ‘-’)
n
 =  ;}
V=-{V
o
 2$ 
If (
v
 = ‘¬x’)
n
 = 7 x ;}
n
 > 7) 
• Computethe Euclidean distance between the 
two vectorsformed bythe 10 esiredvalues 
and the 10 values of each piece.
• Sort music by distances in ascending order. 
View hnerst 10pcs. 
5.5 Search
by history 
We extra from the istor feach user fiv 
typesofinrmation: (a) the kindofesired
pieces, (b) their creation date, (c) the artists (per-
formers), (d) he lked albums, (e) favourite 
impressions. 
The sarch method has the following steps:  
• Seh the user’s history in the databaseand 
check if the user has already searched with te 
five previous conditions. 
•  If the user has searched for cndo (a) or 
(b) or (c) or (d), we extac the last vlueof 
found for each of tm. 4 vlu ar obtained. 
85
 Ifthe user searches by impresion (cdition 
(e)), we compute for ach dmesion the aver-
age that represents the history of the searches.  
• Searh for msic using te vlus obtaind at
step 2.   
If (e) is verified, we compute the Eucliean 
distance beteen the average of impressions 
representing the history and impressions exit-
ing in the database. 
If (e) is not verified, we look for pieces, using 
only the 4 values obtained by the conditions 
((a), (b), (c), (d)).  
Here anxmpleof a history f one usr. For 
condition (a), the latest search value is “Pop”. 
For condition (b), ther is no value, . the user 
did not search by creaton date. For condition(c), 
the latest search value is “1” (number of the ar-
tist). For conditio(d), thlatest search value is 
“2” (number of the album). For condition (e), 
there are 3 vectors in the search history: 
V1=(2 5Nil 3l 27 1Nil ) 
V234..53.6.4l52) 
V3(.  l  l   3Nil 
 
Wecompute h averg ofthe istory, V
m
:  
V
m
=(2.83 4.65 4.5 2.53 Nil 2.55 6.7 2 5 2)
 
search for pieces that verify the complex 
condition:(Kind of music = 'Pop') AND (Num-
ber of he artst ='1') AND (Album ID ='2')  
(Impressions vector is closestto Vm according to 
the Euclidean distance). 
If the search is successful, then the result is 
optimal. Otherwise, we search pieces that cores-
pond to he second condition: ((Kind of music = 
'Pop') R (Number ofthe artist ='1) OR (Album 
ID='2')) AD (Impressions vector isclosest to
Vm acrdingth Euclidn istance). 
We ef is search through other cobina-
tionsormedbythe coitios (a), (b), (c), (d) 
and (e) and differentiated by the OR and AND 
operators. 
6 Multiingual
porting 
To bild or ctet extractor, we started from a
content extractor for French e had previously 
develop for the same domain, intgrated t nto 
IMRS-g, and extended it as explained above 
(more information type, and fuzzy sets). We then 
ported it o English to Arabic, using the sec-
ond technique of external porting (when one has 
access to the inal representatio).
Seeing the lrge percntage of common code 
to the 3 cotent extractors obtained, we factor-
isedit andobtained a uniqe content extractor 
handling input utterances in the music domain i
our 3 targetlanguages: French, English and Ara-
bic. This technique is perhaps not generalizable, 
but itworks for this sub-lanuage, wich isvery 
small, and he simple task of extracting in-
formation representablin very small textual 
fragments. 
Hereasome xamples of result for Arabic, 
Frnch nd English:
Exemple_Ar 1 ://je veux un 
morceau de musique très calme 
Musique_Ar 1: musique-spec=(nil 7,0 nil nil 
nil nil nil nil nil nil)
Exemple_Ar 2 : //je veux 
un morceau de musique un peu bruité 
Musique_Ar 2: musique-spec=(3,0 nil nil nil 
nil nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_Fr 1:je veux un morceau de musique 
calme et très solennel
Musique_Fr 1: musique-spec=(nil 6,0 nil nil 
7,0 nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_Fr 2:je veux un morceau de musique 
assez fort et clair
Musique_Fr 2: musique-spec=(3,0 nil nil 6,0 
nil nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_En 1:I want a calm and very solemn 
music 
Musique_En 1: music-spec=(nil 6,0 nil nil 7,0 
nil nil nil nil nil) 
Exemple_En 2:I want a little noisy and bright 
music 
Musique_En 2: music-spec=(3,0 nil nil 6,0 nil 
nil nil nil nil nil) 
Tableau 1: Examples of results of IMRS-g for Arabic, 
French and English 
Conclusion 
We have prnted sveral posible methods for 
"porting" applicatons based on handling he con-
tent of staneous NL messag ina "native" 
language L1 into another laguage, L2.  In pre-
vious paper, we described experiments and 
evaluations of these methods. 
We tried to an“e-toend” evaluation of 
porting IMRS byuilg a webit tha pro-
poses to engage people n evaluaton of a set of 
music pies, thereby offering them to serch for
86
music in different possible modes. To tha effect, 
wehavepoducafunctioal Websi
(http:/w-
clips.imag.fr/geta/User/najeh.hajlaoui/Musique/). 
To date, the valution has ben doe nly for 
French. More than 30 users have participated, 
perhaps because hey were rwar ia se: 
as a kind of compensation, each use could litn
to approriate music adapted tois wy of pr-
ception and taste. The use of fuzzy logic proved 
useful was perhaps even necessary to give 
some freedom of choice of impresions to users. 
Acknowledgments 
We tha Yi Xiag, who deicatd his TER 
internsipdurinhismaster inCStothe tudy 
and implemention of the IMR-g system. 
 wol also like tohank oureviwers, 
whomadenycsrucivermas and ug-
gestions, which e gladly ncorporated in this 
new version of the paper. 
Refernces 
Daoud, D.M. (206). It is necessary and possible to 
build multilngualNL-based restricted e-
comerce systems with mixed sublanguage and 
contend-oriented ethods. Thèse. Uivrsté Jo-
seph Fourier. Grenoble, France. September 23, 
2006. 296 p.
Grishman, R. and R. Kitredg. (1986). Analyzing 
laguage in restricted domains. Hilsdale NJ. Law-
rence Erlbaum Associates. 24 p.  
Hajlaoui, N.(208) Multinguïsation desytèmes de
e-comerce traiant des énoncés spontanés en 
lang naturelle. Thèse. Uiverité Jph Fouri. 
Grobl. 25septembre 2008. 318 p. 
Haris, Z. (1968). Mathematical structes oflan-
guage. in The Mam Gze. Vl. 54(38): 
pp. 173-174. May, 1970. 
Kitredg, R.(1978). Textual cohesion within sublan-
guages:implicatons for automatc analysis and 
synthesis. Proc. Cling-78. Bergen, Norvège. Au-
gust 14-18, 1978. Vol. 1/1.
Kitredg, R.(1982). Variaton and Homogeneity of
Sublanguages. i Sublae Studes of Lan-
guage in Restricted Semantic Dains. Wlter de 
Gruyter. Beln /New York. 20p. 
Kitrdg, R.(193). Sublanguage Analysis for Natu-
ral Language Processing. Poc. First Symposium 
on Natural Language Processing. Thailand, Bag-
kok pp.69-83. 
Kitredg, R.and J.Lehrbger (1982a). Sublanguage 
Suis of lu in rstic sematic do-
man. Wlter d Gruyter. Brlin / Nw York.
Kumoto, T.(204). Design ad Implementai of
NauralLanguaeItrfceforrsio-based 
Music-Retrival Sysm. Kg-Bad Itel-
ligent Informtion ad Eninerin System. 
Springer Berlin /Heidelberg. October14, 2004. 
Vol. 3214/0: p. 139-147.
Kumamoto, T.(27). A Natural Language Dialogue 
Systemfor Impression-based Music-Retrval.  
Proc. CICLING-07 (Computational Linguistics and 
Intelligent Text Processing). exico. February 12-
24, 2007. 12 p. 
Kumamoto, . and K. Ohta (203). Design ad De-
velopmentofNatural Language Interface for an 
Impressio-based Music Retrieval System. i Joh 
Shori Gakkai enkyu Hokoku.Vol. 4(NL-153):
pp.97-104.
Kurohasi, S.and . Nagao (19) Manul for Japa-
nese MorphologicalAnalysis SystemJUAN. R. 
Language edia Lab. School of Informatics,
Kyot University. Kyot,Japn.Novembr 19. 
Uchida, H., . Zhu, etl. (205-2006). Univesal 
NetworkingLaag 1 2-83990128-5.218 p.
ia, H. d M. hu (19). Encoert 
Specifications, UNU/IAS UNL Center, 33 p.
Zadeh, L.A. (1965). Fuzzy set. Information and Con-
trol 8: pp. 338-353.
87

