Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 15–16,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
IntelligentLinux InformationAccess by Data Mining: the ILIAD Project
Timothy Baldwin,♠ David Martinez,♥ RichardB. Penman,♠ Su Nam Kim,♠
Marco Lui,♠ Li Wang♠ and Andrew MacKinlay♠
♠Dept of Computer Science and Software Engineering,University of Melbourne,Australia
♥NICTA Victoria Research Laboratory
Abstract
We propose an alternative to conventional in-
formation retrieval over Linux forum data,
basedonthread-,post-anduser-levelanalysis,
interfacedwithaninformationretrievalengine
via reranking.
1 Introduction
Due to the sheer scale of web data, simple keyword
matching is an effective means of information ac-
cess for many informational web queries. There
stillremainsignificantclustersofinformationaccess
needs, however, where keyword matching is less
successful. One such instance is technical web fo-
rumsandmailinglists(collectivelytermed“forums”
for the purposes of this paper): technical forums
are a rich source of information when troubleshoot-
ing, and it is often possible to resolve technical
queries/problemsvia web-archived data. The search
facilities provided by forums and web search en-
gines tend to be over-simplistic, however, and there
isadesperateneedformoresophisticatedsearch(Xi
et al., 2004; Seo et al., 2009), including: favour-
ing threads which have led to a successful resolu-
tion; reflecting the degree of clarity/reproducibility
of the proposed solution in a given thread; repre-
senting threads via their threaded rather than sim-
ple chronological structure; the ability to highlight
key aspects of the thread, in terms of the problem
description and solution which led to a successful
resolution; and ideally, the ability to represent the
problem and solution in normalised form via infor-
mation extraction.
This paper provides a brief outline of an attempt
to achieve these and other goals in the context of
Linux web user forum data, in the form of the IL-
IAD (Intelligent Linux Information Access by Data
Mining) project. Linux users and developers rely
particularly heavily on web user forums and mail-
ing lists, due to the nature of the community, which
is highlydecentralised— withmassive proliferation
ofpackagesanddistributions—andnotoriouslybad
at maintaining up-to-date documentation at a level
suitable for newbie and even intermediateusers.
2 Project
Outline
Our proposed solution is as follows: (1) crawl data
from a variety of web user forums; (2) analyse each
thread,toidentifynamedentitiesandgeneratemeta-
data; (3) analyse post-level linkages; (4) predict
user-levelfeatureswhichareexpectedtoimpingeon
the quality of search results; and finally (5) draw to-
gether the features from (1) to (4) to enhance the
quality of a traditional ranked IR approach. We
briefly review each step below. Given space limi-
tations, we focus on outlining our interpretation of
the task in this paper. For further details and results,
the reader is referred to the key papers cited herein.
2.1 Crawling
The first step is to crawl data from a variety of fo-
rumsandmailinglists,forwhichwehave developed
open-source scraping software in the form of SITE-
SCRAPER.1 SITESCRAPER isdesignedsuchthatthe
user simply copies relevant content from a browser-
rendered version of a given set of pages, which it
interprets as a structured record, and translates into
a generalisedXPATH query.
2.2 Thread-level analysis
Next, we perform named entity recognition (NER)
over each thread to identify entities such as package
and distribution names, version numbers and snip-
pets of code; as part of this, we perform version
1http://sitescraper.googlecode.com/
15
anchoring, in identifying what entity each version
number relates to.
To generate thread-level metadata, we classify
each thread for the following three features, based
on an ordinal scale of 1–5 (Baldwin et al., 2007):
Complete: Is the problem descriptioncomplete?
Solved: Is a solution provided in the thread?
Task Oriented: Is the thread about a specific
problem?
We additionally automatically classify the nature
of the thread content, in terms of, e.g., whether it
containsdocumentationor installationdetails, or re-
lates to software, hardware or programming.
Our experimentson thread-level classificationare
based on a set of 250 annotated threads from Lin-
uxQuestions and other forums, as well as a dataset
from CNET.
2.3 Post-level analysis
We automaticallyanalyse the post-to-postdiscourse
structure of each thread, in terms of which (preced-
ing) post(s) each post relates to, and how, building
off the work of Ros´e et al. (1995)and Wolf and Gib-
son (2005). For example, a given post may refute
the solution proposed in an earlier post, and also
propose a novel solution in response to the initiat-
ing post.
Separately, we are developing techniques for
identifying whether a new post to a given forum
is sufficiently similar to other (ideally resolved)
threads that the author should be prompted to first
check the existing threads for redundancy before a
new thread is initiated.
Our experiments on post-level analysis are, once
again, based on data from LinuxQuestions and
CNET.
2.4 User-level analysis
We are also experimentingwith profiling users vari-
ously,basedona5-pointordinalscaleacrossarange
of user characteristics. Our experiments are based
on data from LinuxQuestions(Lui, 2009).
2.5 IR
ranking
The various features are interfaced with an ad hoc
information retrieval (IR) system via a learning-to-
rank approach (Cao et al., 2007). In order to carry
outIRevaluation,wehavedevelopedasetofqueries
and relevance judgements over a large-scale set of
forum data.
Our experimentsto date have been basedon com-
bination over three IR engines (LUCENE, ZETTAIR
and LEMUR), and involved thread-level metadata
only, butwehaveachievedencouragingresults,sug-
gesting that thread-level metadata can enhance IR
effectiveness.
3 Conclusions
This paperprovidesan outlineof the ILIADproject,
focusing on the tasks of crawling, thread-level anal-
ysis, post-level analysis, user-level analysis and IR
reranking. We have designed a series of class sets
for the componenttasks, and carried out experimen-
tation over a range of data sources, achieving en-
couragingresults.
Acknowledgements
NICTA is funded by the Australian Government as rep-
resented by the Department of Broadband, Communica-
tions and the Digital Economy and the Australian Re-
searchCouncilthroughtheICTCentreofExcellencepro-
gram.
References
T Baldwin, D Martinez, and RB Penman. 2007. Auto-
matic thread classificationfor Linux user forum infor-
mation access. In Proc of ADCS 2007.
Z Cao, T Qin, TY Liu, MF Tsai, and H Li. 2007. Learn-
ing to rank: from pairwise approach to listwise ap-
proach. In Proc of ICML 2007.
M Lui. 2009. Impactof user characteristicson onlinefo-
rum classificationtasks. Honours thesis, University of
Melbourne. http://repository.unimelb.edu.
au/10187/5745.
CP Ros´e, B Di Eugenio, LS Levin, and C Van Ess-
Dykema. 1995. Discourse processing of dialogues
with multiple threads. In Proc of ACL 1995.
J Seo, WB Croft, and DA Smith. 2009. Online commu-
nity search using thread structure. In Proc of CIKM
2009.
F Wolf and E Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse co-
herence: A corpus-basedstudy. Comp Ling, 31(2).
W Xi, J Lind,andE Brill. 2004. Learningeffective rank-
ing functions for newsgroup search. In Proc of SIGIR
2004.
16

