Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 86–94,
Uppsala, July 2010.
Contradiction-FocusedQualitative EvaluationofTextualEntailment
BernardoMagnini
FBK-Irst
Trento, Italy
magnini@fbk.eu
ElenaCabrio
FBK-Irst,University of Trento
Trento, Italy
cabrio@fbk.eu
Abstract
In this paper we investigate the rela-
tion between positive and negative pairs
in Textual Entailment (TE), in order to
highlight the role of contradictionin TE
datasets. We base our analysis on the de-
compositionof Text-Hypothesispairs into
monothematicpairs, i.e. pairs where only
one linguisticphenomenonat a time is re-
sponsiblefor entailmentjudgmentand we
argue that such a deeper inspectionof the
linguistic phenomena behind textual en-
tailmentis necessaryin order to highlight
the role of contradiction. We support our
analysis with a number of empirical ex-
periments,which use currentavailableTE
systems.
1 Introduction
Textual Entailment(TE) (Dagan et al., 2009) pro-
vides a powerful and general framework for ap-
plied semantics.TE has been exploitedin a series
of evaluationcampaigns(RTE RecognizingTex-
tual Entailment) (Bentivogli et al., 2009), where
systemsare asked to automaticallyjudge whether
the meaning of a portion of text, referred as Text
(T), entails the meaning of another text, referred
as Hypothesis(H).
RTE datasets have been mainly built with the
purpose of showing the applicability of the TE
framework to different semantic applications in
ComputationalLinguistics. Starting from 2005,
[T,H] pairs were created including samples from
summarization, question answering, information
extraction,and other applications.This evaluation
provides useful cues for researchersand develop-
ers aimingat the integrationof TE componentsin
larger applications(see, for instance, the use of a
TE engine for question answering in the QALL-
ME project system1, the use in relationextraction
(Romanoet al., 2006),and in readingcomprehen-
sion systems(Nielsenet al., 2009)).
Although the RTE evaluations showed pro-
gresses in TE technologies,we think that there is
still large room for improving qualitative analysis
of boththe RTE datasetsand the systemresults. In
particular, we intendto focusthis paperon contra-
dictionjudgmentsand on a deep inspectionof the
linguistic phenomena that determine such judg-
ments. More specifically, we address two distin-
guishing aspects of TE: (i) the variety of linguis-
tic phenomenathat are relevant for contradiction
and how their distribution is representedin RTE
datasets;(ii) the fact that in TE it is not enoughto
detect the polarity of a sentence, as in traditional
semanticanalysis,but ratherit is necessaryto ana-
lyze the dependenciesbetweentwo sentences(i.e.
the [T,H] pair) in orderto establishwhethera con-
tradiction holds between the pair. Under this re-
spect we are interested to investigate both how
polarity among Text and Hypothesis affects the
entailment/contradictionjudgments and how dif-
ferent linguisticphenomenainteract with polarity
(e.g. whetherspecificcombinationsof phenomena
are more frequentthan others).
As an example,let us considerthe pair:
T: Mexico’s new president,Felipe Calderon, seems to be
doing all the right thingsin cracking down on Mexico’s drug
traffickers.[...]
H: Felipe Calderon is the outgoingPresidentof Mexico.
In orderto detectthe correctcontradictionjudg-
ment betweenT and H it is necessaryto solve the
semanticinferencethat beingthe new Presidentof
a country is not compatiblewith being the outgo-
ing President of the same country. This kind of
inferencerequiresthat (i) the semanticopposition
is detected,and that (ii) such oppositionis consid-
1http://qallme.fbk.eu/
86
Textsnippet(pair125) Phenomena Judg.
T Mexico’s newpresident,FelipeCalderon, seemsto be doing
all the right thingsin crackingdown on Mexico’s drug traffickers. [...]
lexical:semantic-opposition C
H FelipeCalderonis the outgoingPresidentof Mexico. syntactic:argument-realization
syntactic:apposition
H1 Mexico’s outgoingpresident,FelipeCalderon,seemsto be lexical:semantic-opposition C
doing all the right thingsin crackingdown on Mexico’s drug
traffickers. [...]
H2 ThenewpresidentofMexico, FelipeCalderon,seemsto be syntactic:argument-realization E
doing all the right thingsin crackingdown on Mexico’s drug
traffickers. [...]
H3 FelipeCalderon is Mexico’s newpresident. syntactic:apposition E
Table 1: Applicationof the decompositionmethodologyto an originalRTE pair
ered relevant for the contradictionjudgmentin the
specificcontext of the pair.
In order to address the issues above, we pro-
pose a methodologybased on the decomposition
of [T,H] pairs into monothematicpairs, each rep-
resenting one single linguistic phenomenonrele-
vant for entailment judgment. Then, the analy-
sis is carried out both on the original [T,H] pair
and on the monothematic pairs originated from
it. In particular, we investigate the correlationson
positive and on negative pairs separately, and we
show that the strategies adopted by the TE sys-
tems to deal with phenomenacontributing to the
entailmentor to the contradictionjudgmentcome
to light when analyzed using qualitative criteria.
We have experimentedthe decompositionmethod-
ology over a dataset of pairs, which either are
marked with a contradictionjudgment,or show a
polarityphenomenon(eitherin T or H) which,al-
thoughpresent,is not relevant for cotradiction.
The final goal underlyingour analysis of con-
tradiction in current RTE datasets is to discover
good strategies for systems to manage contradic-
tion and, more generally, entailment judgments.
To this aim, in Section5 we proposea comparison
betweentwo systemsparticipatingat the last RTE-
5 campaignand try to analyzetheir behaviour ac-
cording to the decompositioninto monothematic
pairs.
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2
presents the main aspects related to contradiction
within the RTE context. Section 3 explains the
procedurefor the creation of monothematicpairs
starting from RTE pairs. Section 4 describes the
experimentalsetup of our pilot study, as well as
the results of the qualitative analysis. Section 5
outlinesthe preliminaryachievements in terms of
comparisonof systems’strategies in orderto man-
age contradiction. Finally, Section 6 reports on
previous work on contradictionand textual entail-
ment.
2 ContradictionandTextualEntailment
In RTE, two kinds of judgmentare allowed: two
ways (yes or no entailment) or three way judg-
ment. In the latter, systemsare requiredto decide
whetherthe hypothesisis entailedby the text (en-
tailment), contradicts the text (contradiction), or
is neither entailedby nor contradictsthe text (un-
known). The RTE-4 and RTE-5 datasetsare anno-
tated for a 3-way decision:entailment(50%of the
pairs),unknown (35%),contradiction(15%). This
distributionamongthe threeentailmentjudgments
aims at reflecting the natural distribution of en-
tailmentin a corpus, where the percentage of text
snippets neither entailing nor contradictingeach
otheris higherthanthe contradictingones. Even if
this balanceseems artificialsince in a natural set-
ting the presenceof unknown pairsis muchhigher
than the other two judgments(as demonstratedin
the Pilot Task proposed in RTE-5 (Bentivogli et
al., 2009)), the reason behind the choice of RTE
organizers is to maintain a trade-off between the
natural distribution of the data in real documents,
and the creationof a datasetbalancedbeweenpos-
itive and negative examples(as in two way task).
As already pointed out in (Wang, 2009), the
similaritybetweenT’s and H’s in pairs marked as
entailmentand contradictionis much higher with
respect to the similarity between T’s and H’s in
pairs marked as unknown. To support this in-
tuition, (Bentivogli et al., 2009) provides some
data on the lexical overlap between T’s and H’s
in the last RTE Challenges.For instance,in RTE-
4 the lexicaloverlapis 68.95%in entailmentpairs,
67.97%in contradiction pairs and only 57.36%in
87
the unknown pairs. Similarly, in RTE-5the lexical
overlap between T’s and H’s is 77.14% in entail-
mentpairs,78.93%in contradictionpairs and only
62.28%in the unknown pairs.
For this reason, for contradictiondetectionit is
not sufficient to highlight mismatchinginforma-
tionbetweensentences,but deepercomprehension
is required. For applicationsin informationanal-
ysis, it can be very importantto detect incompat-
ibility and discrepanciesin the descriptionof the
same event, and the contradictionjudgmentin the
TE task aims at covering this aspect. More specif-
ically, in the RTE task the contradictionjudgment
is assigned to a T,H pair when the two text frag-
mentsare extremelyunlikely to be true simultane-
ously.
According to Marneffe et al. (2008), contra-
dictions may arise from a number of different
constructions,defined in two primary categories:
i) those occurring via antonymy, negation, and
numeric mismatch, and ii) contradictionsarising
from the use of factive or modal words, structural
and subtlelexicalcontrasts,and world knowledge.
Comparingthe distribution of contradictiontypes
for RTE-3 and the real contradictioncorpus they
createdcollectingcontradiction“in the wild” (e.g.
from newswire, Wikipedia), they noticed that in
the latter there is a much higher rate of negations,
numeric and lexical contradictions with respect
to RTE dataset, where contradictionsof category
(ii) occur more frequently. Analyzing RTE data
of the previous challenges, we noticed that the
tendency towards longer and more complex
sentences in the datasets in order to reproduce
more realistic scenarios, is also reflected in more
complex structures determining contradictions.
For instance, contradictions arising from overt
negation as in (pair 1663, RTE-1 test set):
T: All residentialareas in South Africa are segregated by
race and no black neighborhoodshave been establishedin
Port Nolloth.
H: Black neighborhoodsare locatedin Port Nolloth.
are infrequentin the datasets of more recent RTE
challenges.For instance,in RTE-5test set, only in
4 out of 90 contradictionpairs an overt negation
is responsible for the contradiction judgment.
In agreement with (Marneffe et al., 2008), we
also remarked that most of the contradiction
involve numeric mismatch, wrong appositions,
entity mismatchand, above all, deeper inferences
depending on backgroundand world knowledge,
as in (pair 567, RTE-5 test set):
T: ”[...] we’ve done a series of tests on SenatorKennedy
to determinethe cause of his seizure. He has had no further
seizures, remains in good overall condition, and is up and
walkingaround the hospital”.
H: Ted Kennedyis dead.
These considerations do not mean that overt
negations do not appear in the RTE pairs. On the
contrary, they are often present in T,H pairs, but
most of the timestheir presenceis irrelevant in the
assignmentof the correct entailmentjudgmentto
the pair. For instance, the scope of the negation
can be a phraseor a sentencewithadditionalinfor-
mation with respect to the relevant parts of T and
H that allow to correctlyjudge the pair. This fact
could be misleadingfor systems that do not cor-
recly exploit syntacticinformation,as the experi-
ments using Linear Distancedescribedin (Cabrio
et al., 2008).
3 DecomposingRTEpairs
The qualitative evaluation we propose takes
advantage of previous work on monothematic
datasets. A monothematic pair (Magnini and
Cabrio,2009)is definedas a [T,H] pair in whicha
certain phenomenonrelevant to the entailmentre-
lationis highlightedand isolated.The mainidea is
to create such monothematicpairs on the basis of
the phenomenawhich are actually present in the
original RTE pairs, so that the actual distribution
of the linguistic phenomenainvolved in the entail-
ment relationemerges.
For the decompositionprocedure, we refer to
the methodology described in (Bentivogli et al.,
2010), consisting of a number of steps carried
out manually. The starting point is a [T,H] pair
taken fromone of the RTE datasets,that shouldbe
decomposedin a number of monothematicpairs
[T,Hi]mono, whereT is the original Text and Hi
are the Hypothesescreatedfor eachlinguisticphe-
nomenonrelevant for judgingthe entailmentrela-
tion in [T,H].
In detail, the procedure for the creation of
monothematicpairs is composedof the following
steps:
1. Individuate the linguistic phenomena which
contribute to the entailmentin [T,H].
2. For each phenomenoni:
88
(a) Individuate a general entailmentrule ri
for the phenomenon i, and instantiate
the rule usingthe portionof T whichex-
presses i as the left hand side (LHS) of
the rule, and informationfrom H on i as
the right hand side (RHS)of the rule.
(b) Substitutethe portion of T that matches
the LHS of ri with the RHS of ri.
(c) Considerthe result of the previous step
as Hi, and compose the monothematic
pair [T,Hi]mono. Mark the pair with
phenomenoni.
3. Assign an entailment judgment to each
monothematicpair.
Relevant linguisticphenomenaare groupedus-
ing both fine-grainedcategories and broadercate-
gories. Macro categories are defined referring to
widely accepted linguistic categories in the liter-
ature (e.g. (Garoufi, 2007)) and to the inference
types typicallyaddressedin RTE systems:lexical,
syntactic, lexical-syntactic, discourse and reason-
ing. Each macro category includes fine-grained
phenomena(Table 2 reports a list of some of the
phenomenadetectedin RTE-5 dataset).
Table 1 shows an example of the decomposi-
tion of a RTE pair (marked as contradiction) into
monothematicpairs. At step 1 of the methodology
both the phenomenathat preserve the entailment
and the phenomenathat breakthe entailmentrules
causing a contradiction in the pair are detected,
i.e. argument realization, apposition and seman-
tic opposition (column phenomena in the table).
While the monothematicpairs created basing on
the first two phenomenapreserve the entailment,
the semanticoppositiongeneratesa contradiction
(columnjudgment).
As an example, let’s apply step by step the
procedure to the phenomenonof semantic oppo-
sition. At step 2a of the methodologythe general
rule:
Pattern: x ⇐/⇒y
Constraint:semanticopposition(y,x)
is instantiated(new⇐ / ⇒outgoing), and at step
2b the substitution in T is carried out (Mexico’s
outgoing president, Felipe Calderon [...]). At
step 2c a negative monothematic pair T,H1 is
composed (column text snippet in the table) and
marked as semantic opposition (macro-category
lexical), and the pair is judgedas contradiction.
In (Bentivogli et al., 2010), critical issues con-
cerningthe applicationof such procedureare dis-
cussedin detail, and more examplesare provided.
Furthermore,a pilotresourceis created,composed
of a first dataset with 60 pairs from RTE-5 test
set (30 positive, and 30 negative randomly ex-
tracted examples), and a dataset composedof all
the monothematicpairs derived by the first one
following the procedure described before. The
second dataset is composedof 167 pairs (134 en-
tailment, 33 contradiction examples, considering
35 different linguisticphenomena).2
4 Analysisanddiscussion
Our analysis has been carried out taking advan-
tage of the pilot resource created by Bentivogli
et al. (2010). From their first dataset we ex-
tracted a sample of 48 pairs ([T,H]sample−contr)
composedof 30 contradictionpairs and 18 entail-
ment pairs, the latter containingeither in T or in
H a directly or an indirectly licensed negation.3
Furthermore,a datasetof 129 monothematicpairs
(96 entailment and 33 contradiction examples),
i.e. [T,H]mono−contr, was derived by the pairs
in [T,H]sample−contr applying the procedure de-
scribed in Section 3. The linguistic phenomena
isolatedin the monothematicpairs(i.e. considered
relevant to correctly assign the entailment judg-
ment to our sample)are listed in Table 2.
In RTE datasetsonlya subpartof the potentially
problematicphenomenaconcerningnegation and
negative polarityitemsis represented.At the same
time, the specificityof the task lies in the fact that
it is not enough to find the correct representation
of the linguisticphenomenaunderlyinga sentence
meaning,but correctinferencesshould be derived
fromthe relationsthatthesephenomenacontribute
to establish between two text fragments. The
mere presence of a negation in T is not relevant
for the TE task, unlessthe scopeof the negation(a
token or a phrase) is present as non-negated in H
2Both datasets are freely available at
http://hlt.fbk.eu/en/Technology/TESpecializedData
3Following (Harabagiu et al., 2006) overt (directly li-
censed) negations include i) overt negative markers such as
not, n’t; ii) negative quantifiersas no, and expressionssuch
as no one and nothing; iii) strongnegative adverbs like never.
Indirectly licensed negations include: i) verbs or phrasal
verbs (e.g. deny, fail, refuse, keep from); ii) prepositions(e.g.
without, except); weak quantifiers(e.g. few, any, some), and
iv) traditionalnegative polarityitems (e.g. a red cent or any-
more).
89
phenomena # pairs[T,H]
RTE5−mono−contr
entailment contradiction
# mono probab. # mono probab.
lex:identity 1 0.25 3 0.75
lex:format 2 1 -
lex:acronymy 1 1 -
lex:demonymy 1 1 -
lex:synonymy 6 1 -
lex:semantic-opp. 3 1
lex:hypernymy 2 1 -
TOT lexical 13 0.68 6 0.32
lexsynt:transp-head 2 1 -
lexsynt:verb-nom. 6 1 -
lexsynt:causative 1 1 -
lexsynt:paraphrase 2 1 -
TOT lexical-syntactic 11 1 -
synt:negation 1 1
synt:modifier 3 0.75 1 0.25
synt:arg-realization 4 1 -
synt:apposition 9 0.6 6 0.4
synt:list 1 1 -
synt:coordination 2 1 -
synt:actpass-altern. 4 0.67 2 0.33
TOT syntactic 23 0.7 10 0.3
disc:coreference 16 1 -
disc:apposition 2 1 -
disc:anaphora-zero 3 1 -
disc:ellipsis 3 1 -
disc:statements 1 1 -
TOT discourse 25 1 -
reas:apposition 1 0.5 1 0.5
reas:modifier 2 1 -
reas:genitive 1 1 -
reas:meronymy 1 0.5 1 0.5
reas:quantity 5 1
reas:spatial 1 1 -
reas:gen-inference 18 0.64 10 0.36
TOT reasoning 24 0.59 17 0.41
TOT (all phenomena) 96 0.74 33 0.26
Table 2: Occurrencesof linguistic phenomenain
TE contradictionpairs
(or viceversa), hence a contradictionis generated.
For this reason, 18 pairs of [T,H]sample−contr
are judged as entailment even if a negation is
present, but it is not relevant to correctly assign
the entailment judgment to the pair as in (pair
205, RTE-5 test set):
T: A team of European and American astronomers say
that a recently discovered extrasolar planet, located not far
from Earth,containsoceansandrivers of hot solidwater. The
team discovered the planet,Gliese436 b [...].
H: Gliese436 b was foundby scientists from Americaand
Europe.
As showed in Table 2, only in one pair of
our sample the presence of a negation is relevant
to assign the contradiction judgment to the pair.
In the pairs we analyzed, contradiction mainly
arise from quantity mismatching,semantic oppo-
sition (antonymy), mismatchingappositions(e.g.
the Swiss Foreign Minister x contradicts y is the
Swiss Foreign Minister), and from general infer-
ence (e.g. x became a naturalized citizen of the
U.S. contradictsx is born in the U.S.). Due to the
small sample we analyzed, some phenomenaap-
pear rarely, and their distribution can not be con-
sideredas representative of the same phenomenon
in a natural setting. In 27 out of 30 contradiction
pairs,only one monothematicpair amongthe ones
derived from each example was marked as con-
tradiction, meaning that on average only one lin-
guistic phenomenonis responsiblefor the contra-
diction judgmentin a TE originalpair. Hence the
importanceof detectingit.
Given the list of the phenomena isolated in
[T,H]mono−contr with their frequency both in
monothematic positive pairs and monothematic
negative pairs, we derived the probability of lin-
guistic phenomena to contribute more to the as-
signment of a certain judgment than to another
(column probab. in Table 2). Such probabilityP
of a phenomenoni to appear in a positive (or in a
negative) pair is calculatedas follows:
P(i|[T,H]positive) = #(i|[T,H]RTE5−positive−mono)#(i|[T,H]
RTE5−mono) (1)
For instance, if the phenomenonsemantic op-
position appears in 3 pairs of our sample and all
these pairs are marked as contradiction, we as-
sign a probability of 1 to a pair containing a se-
mantic oppositionto be marked as contradiction.
If the phenomenonapposition(syntax)appearsin
9 monothematicpositive pairs and in 6 negative
pairs, that phenomenonhas a probabilityof 0.6 to
appear in positive examples and 0.4 to appear in
negative examples.Due to their nature,some phe-
nomenaare stronglyrelated to a certain judgment
(e.g. semanticopposition),while other can appear
both in positive and in negative pairs. Learning
suchcorrelationson larger datasetscould be an in-
terestingfeature to be exploitedby TE systemsin
the assignment of a certain judgment if the phe-
nomenoni is detectedin the pair.
Table3 reportsthe cooccurrencesof the linguis-
tic phenomena relevant to inference in the pairs
marked as contradiction. On the first horizontal
row all the phenomena that at least in one pair
determine contradiction are listed, while in the
first column there are all the phenomena cooc-
curring with them in the pairs. The idea un-
delying this table is to understand if it is possi-
ble to identifyrecurrentpatternsof cooccurrences
between phenomena in contradiction pairs. As
can be noticed, almost all phenomena occur to-
getherwithexpressionsrequiringdeeperinference
90
lex:identity
lex:sem
opposition
synt:ne
gation
synt:modifier
synt:apposition
synt:actpass
alternreas:meron
ymyreas:quantity
reas:gen
inference
lex:identity 1 1
lex:format 1
lex:acronymy 1
lex:synonymy 1 1 1 1
lex:hypernymy 1
lexsynt:vrb-nom 1 1 1
lexsynt:caus. 1
synt:modifier 1
synt:arg-realiz. 1 1
synt:apposition 2 3
synt:coord. 1
synt:actpass 1 1
disc:coref. 3 1 4
disc:apposition
disc:anaph-0 1 1
disc:ellipsis 1 1 2
disc:statements 1
reas:genitive 1
reas:meronymy 1
reas:gen-infer. 1 1 3 1 2 1
Table 3: Cooccurrenciesof phenomenain contra-
dictionpairs
(reas:general inference), but this is due to the fact
that this category is the most frequentone. Beside
this, it seemsthat no specificpatternscan be high-
lighted,but it could be worth to extend this analy-
sis increasingthe numberof pairs of the sample.
5 ComparingRTEsystems’behaviour
oncontradictionpairs
As introducedbefore, from a contradictionpair it
is possible to extract on average 3 monothematic
pairs (Bentivogli et al., 2009), and only one of
these monothematicpairs is marked as contradic-
tion. This means that on average only one lin-
guistic phenomenonis responsiblefor the contra-
diction judgment in a RTE pair, while the others
maintainthe entailmentrelation(i.e. it is possible
to correclyapplyan entailmentrule as exemplified
in Section 3). On the contrary, in a pair judged
as entailment,all the monothematicpairs derived
from it are marked as entailment.
These observations point out the fact that if a
TE system is able to correctly isolate and judge
the phenomenonthat generatesthe contradiction,
the system should be able to assign the correct
judgmentto the originalcontradictionpair, despite
possible mistakes in handling the other phenom-
ena presentin that pair.
In order to understand how it is possible to
take advantage of the data analyzed so far to
improve a TE system, we run two systems that
took part into the last RTE challenge(RTE-5) on
[T,H]mono−contr.
The first system we used is the EDITS system
(Edit DistanceTextual EntailmentSuite)(Negri et
al., 2009)4, that assumesthat the distancebetween
T and H is a characteristicsthat separatesthe pos-
itive pairs, for which entailment holds, from the
negative pairs, for whichentailmentdoes not hold
(it is developed accordingto the two way task). It
is basedon edit distancealgorithms,and computes
the [T,H] distanceas the overallcostof the editop-
erations (i.e. insertion, deletion and substitution)
that are requiredto transformT into H. In partic-
ular, we applied the model that produced EDITS
best run at RTE-5(acc. on RTE-5test set: 60.2%).
The main features of this run are: Tree Edit Dis-
tance algorithm on the parsed trees of T and H,
Wikipedialexical entailmentrules, and PSO opti-
mizedoperationcosts, as describedin (Mehdadet
al., 2009).
The other system used in our experiments
is VENSES5 (Delmonte et al., 2009), that ob-
tained performancessimilar to EDITS at RTE-5
(acc. on test set: 61.5%). VENSES applies a
linguistically-basedapproach for semantic infer-
ence, composed of two main components: i) a
grammatically-driven subsystemthat validatesthe
well-formednessof the predicate-argument struc-
ture and works on the output of a deep parser
producing augmented (i.e. fully indexed) head-
dependency structures; and ii) a subsystem that
detectsallowed logicaland lexical inferencesbas-
ing on different kind of structuraltransformations
intended to produce a semantically valid mean-
ing correspondence. The system has a pronomi-
nal binding module that works at text/hypothesis
level separately for lexical personal, possessive
and reflexive pronouns, which are substituted by
the heads of their antecedents. Also in this case,
we applied the same configurationof the system
used in RTE evaluation.
Table 4 reportsEDITSand VENSESaccuracies
on the monothematicpairs of [T,H]mono−contr.
As said before, the accuracy reportedfor some
very rare phenomenacannot be consideredcom-
pletely reliable. Nevertheless,from these data the
mainfeaturesof the systemscan be identified.For
instance,EDITSobtainsthe highestaccuracieson
the positive monothematicpairs, while it seems it
has no peculiarstrategies to deal with phenomena
4http://edits.fbk.eu/
5http://project.cgm.unive.it/venses en.html
91
phenomena EDITS VENSES
% acc. % acc.
pos. neg. pos. neg.
lex:identity 100 0 100 33.3
lex:format 100 100 -
lex:acronymy 100 0 -
lex:demonymy 100 100 -
lex:synonymy 80.3 80.3 -
lex:semantic-opp. 0 100
lex:hypernymy 100 100 -
TOT lexical 96.7 0 80 66.6
lexsynt:transp-head 100 50 -
lexsynt:verb-nom. 83.3 16 -
lexsynt:causative 100 100 -
lexsynt:paraphrase 100 100 -
TOT lexical-syntactic 95.8 66.5 -
synt:negation 0 0
synt:modifier 100 0 33.3 100
synt:arg-realization 100 50 -
synt:apposition 100 33.3 55.5 83.3
synt:list 100 100 -
synt:coordination 100 50 -
synt:actpass-altern. 100 0 25 50
TOT syntactic 100 22.2 52.3 77.7
disc:coreference 95 50 -
disc:apposition 100 0 -
disc:anaphora-zero 100 33.3 -
disc:ellipsis 100 33.3 -
disc:statements 100 0 -
TOT discourse 99 23.3 -
reas:apposition 100 0 100 100
reas:modifier 50 100 -
reas:genitive 100 100 -
reas:meronymy 100 0 100 0
reas:quantity 0 80
reas:spatial 100 0 -
reas:gen-inference 87.5 50 37.5 90
TOT reasoning 89.5 35.2 72.9 82.3
TOT (all phenomena) 96.2 25 59 81.2
Table 4: RTE systems’accuracy on phenomena
that generally cause contradiction (e.g. seman-
tic opposition, negation, and quantity mismatch-
ing). On the contrary, VENSES shows an oppo-
site behaviour, obtaining the best results on the
negative cases. Analysingsuch data it is possible
to hypothesize systems’behaviours: for example,
on the monothematicdataset EDITS produces a
prettyhighnumberof falsepositives, meaningthat
for this system if there are no evidences of con-
tradiction, a pair should be marked as entailment
(in order to improve such system,strategies to de-
tect contradictionpairsshouldbe thought).On the
contrary, VENSESproducesa pretty high number
of falsenegatives, meaningthatif the systemis not
able to find evidencesof entailment,it assignsthe
contradictionvalue to the pairs (for this system,
being able to correctly detect all the phenomena
contributing to entailmentin a pair is fundamen-
tal, otherwiseit will be marked as contradiction).
6 RelatedWork
Condoravdi et al. (2003) first proposed contra-
diction detection as an important NLP task, then
(Harabagiu et al., 2006) provided the first em-
pirical results for it, focusing on contradiction
caused by negation, antonymy, and paraphrases.
Voorhees (2008) carries out an analysis of RTE-
3 extended task, examining systems’ abilities to
detect contradiction and providing explanations
of their reasoning when making entailmentdeci-
sions.
Beside defining the categories of construction
from which contradictionmay arise, Marneffe et
al. (2008) provide the annotation of the RTE
datasets (RTE-1 and RTE-2) for contradiction.
Furthermore, they also collect contradiction “in
the wild”(e.g. fromnewswire, Wikipedia)to sam-
ple naturallyoccurringones.6
Ritter et al. (2008) extend (Marneffe et al.,
2008)’s analysisto a classof contradictionthatcan
only be detectedusing backgroudknowledge,and
describe a case study of contradiction detection
based on functionalrelations. They also automat-
ically generate a corpus of seeming contradiction
from the Web text.7
Furthermore,some of the systems presentedin
the previous editions of the RTE challenges at-
tempted specic strategies to focus on the phe-
nomenonof negation. For instance, (Snow et al.,
2006) presents a framework for recognizingtex-
tual entailmentthat focuseson the use of syntactic
heuristics to recognize false entailment. Among
the others, heuristics concerning negation mis-
match and antonym match are defined. In (Tatu
et al., 2007) the logic representationof sentences
with negated concepts was altered to mark as
negated the entire scope of the negation. (Ferran-
dez et al., 2009) propose a system facing the en-
tailmentrecognitionby computingshallow lexical
deductionsand richer inferencesbased on seman-
tics,andfeaturesrelatingto negationare extracted.
In (Iftene et al., 2009) several rules are extracted
and appliedto detectcontradictioncases.
7 Conclusion
We have proposeda methodologyfor the qualita-
tive analysisof TE systemsfocusingon contradic-
tion judgments and on the linguistic phenomena
that determine such judgments. The methodology
is based on the decompositionof [T,H] pairs into
monothematic pairs, each representing one sin-
gle linguisticphenomenonrelevant for entailment
6Their corpora are available at http://www-
nlp.stanford.edu/projects/contradiction.
7Availableat http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/au-
contraire/
92
judgment.
In particular, the phenomenafrom which con-
tradictionmay arise and their distribution in RTE
datasets have been highlighted,and a pilot study
comparingthe performanciesof two RTE systems
both on monothematic pairs and on the corre-
sponding original ones has been carried out. We
discovered that, although the two systems have
similar performances in terms of accuracy on the
RTE-5 datasets, they show significantdifferences
in theirrespective abilitiesto correctlymanagedif-
ferent linguistic phenomena that generally cause
contradiction. We hope that the analysis of con-
tradictionin currentRTE datasetsmay bringinter-
esting elementsto TE system developersto define
goodstrategies to managecontradictionand, more
generally, entailmentjudgments.
8 Acknowledgements
This work has been partially supported by the
LiveMemories project (Active Digital Memo-
ries of Collective Life) funded by the Au-
tonomousProvince of Trento under the call “Ma-
jor Projects”. We would like to thank Professor
Rodolfo Delmonte and Sara Tonelli for running
the VENSESsystemon our datasets.
References
Bentivogli, Luisa, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan,
Hoa Trang Dang, and Danilo Giampiccolo. 2009.
The Fifth PASCALRTE Challenge. Proceedingsof
the TAC 2009 Workshop on Textual Entailment. To
appear. Gaithersburg, Maryland.17 November.
Bentivogli, Luisa, Elena Cabrio, Ido Dagan,
Danilo Giampiccolo, Medea Lo Leggio, and
Bernardo Magnini. 2010. Building Textual En-
tailment Specialized Data Sets: a Methodology
for Isolating Linguistic Phenomena Relevant to
Inference. Proceedingsof the 7th LRECconference.
Valletta,Malta.19-21 May.
Cabrio, Elena, Milen Ognianov Kouylekov and
Bernardo Magnini, 2008. CombiningSpecialized
EntailmentEngines for RTE-4, Proceedingsof the
Text AnalysisConference(TAC 2008). Gaithersburg,
Maryland,USA, 17-18 November.
Condoravdi, Cleo, Dick Crouch, Valeria de Paiva,
ReinhardStolle, and Daniel Bobrow. 2003. Entail-
ment, Intentionalityand Text Understanding Pro-
ceedingsof the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshopon Text
Meaning. Edmonton,Alberta,Canada.31 May.
Dagan, Ido, Bill Dolan, Bernardo Magnini, and
Dan Roth. 2009. Recognizingtextual entailment:
Rational, evaluation and approaches. Natural Lan-
guage Engineering(JNLE), Volume 15, Special Is-
sue 04, October2009, pp i-xvii. CambridgeUniver-
sity Press.
De Marneffe, Marie-Catherine,Anna N. Rafferty and
ChristopherD. Manning. 2008. FindingContradic-
tions in Text. Proceedingsof ACL-08: HLT, pages
10391047. Columbus, Ohio, USA, June.
Delmonte, Rodolfo, Sara Tonelli, Rocco Tripodi.
2009. SemanticProcessingfor Text Entailmentwith
VENSES. Proceedingsof the TAC 2009 Workshop
on TE. Gaithersburg, Maryland.17 November.
Garoufi, Konstantina. 2007. Towards a Better Un-
derstandingof AppliedTextual Entailment. Master
Thesis. SaarlandUniversity. Saarbr¨ucken, Germany.
Ferr´andez, ´Oscar, Rafael Mu˜noz, and ManuelPalomar.
2009. Alicante University at TAC 2009: Experi-
ments in RTE. Proceedingsof the TAC 2009 Work-
shop on Textual Entailment. Gaithersburg, Mary-
land. 17 November.
Harabagiu,Sanda,Andrew Hickl,and Finley Lacatusu.
2006. Negation, Contrastand Contradictionin Text
Processing. In Proceedingsof AAAI-06. Boston,
Massachusetts.July 16-20.
Iftene, Adrian, Mihai-Alex Moruz 2009. UAIC
Participation at RTE-5. Proceedings of the TAC
2009 Workshop on Textual Entailment. To appear.
Gaithersburg, Maryland.17 November.
Magnini, Bernardo, and Elena Cabrio. 2009. Com-
bining Specialized Entailment Engines. Proceed-
ings of the LTC ’09 conference. Poznan, Poland.
6-8 November.
Mehdad, Yashar, Matteo Negri, Elena Cabrio,
Milen Kouylekov, and Bernardo Magnini. 2009.
Using Lexical Resources in a Distance-BasedAp-
proachto RTE. Proceedingsof the TAC 2009 Work-
shop on TE. Gaithersburg, Maryland.17 November
2009.
Negri, Matteo, Milen Kouylekov, Bernardo Magnini,
Yashar Mehdad,and Elena Cabrio. 2009. Towards
ExtensibleTextual EntailmentEngines: the EDITS
Package. AI*IA2009: Emergent Perspectivesin Ar-
tificialIntelligence. LectureNotesin ComputerSci-
ence, Springer-Verlag, pp. 314-323.2009.
Nielsen,Rodney D., Wayne Ward, and James H. Mar-
tin. 2009. Recognizingentailmentin intelligenttu-
toring systems. In Ido Dagan, Bill Dolan, Bernardo
Magniniand Dan Roth (Eds.) The Journal of Natu-
ral Language Engineering, (JNLE). 15, pp 479-501.
Copyright CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge,
UnitedKingdom.
Ritter, Alan, Doug Downey, Stephen Soderland, and
Oren Etzioni. 2008. It’s a ContradictionNo, it’s
not: A Case Study using FunctionalRelations. Pro-
ceedingsof 2008 Conference on EmpiricalMethods
93
in Natural Language Processing. Honolulu,Hawaii.
25-27 October.
Romano, Lorenza, Milen Ognianov Kouylekov,
Idan Szpektor, Ido Kalman Dagan, and Al-
berto Lavelli. 2006. Investigating a Generic
Paraphrase-Based Approach for Relation Extrac-
tion. Proceedingsof EACL 2006. Trento, Italy. 3-7
April.
Snow, Rion, Lucy Vanderwende, and Arul Menezes.
2006. Effectively using syntaxfor recognizingfalse
entailment. Proceedings of the main conference
on Human Language Technology Conference of the
NorthAmericanChapterof the Associationof Com-
putationalLinguistics.New York, 4-9 June.
Tatu, Marta, Dan I. Moldovan. 2007. COGEX at
RTE 3. Proceedingsof the ACL-PASCALWorkshop
on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing. Prague,
CzechRepublic,28-29 June.
Voorhees, Ellen M. 2008. Contradictionsand Justifi-
cations: Extentionsto the Textual EntailmentTask.
Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT. Columbus, Ohio,
USA. 15-20 June.
Wang, Rui, and Yi Zhang. 2009. RecognizingTex-
tual Relatedness with Predicate-Argument Struc-
tures. Proceedingsof the 2009 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Singapore,6-7 August.
94

