Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 72–75,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Measuring Risk and Information Preservation: Toward New Metrics for 
De-identification of Clinical Texts 
 
Lynette Hirschman & John Aberden 
The MITRE Corporation 
202 Burlington Rd. 
Bedford, MA 01730 
{lynette,aberdeen}@mitre.org 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Curent metrics for de-identification are based 
on information extraction metrics, and do not 
address the real-world questions “how god 
are curent systems”, and “how god do they 
need to be”. Metrics are needed that quantify 
both the risk of re-identification and informa-
tion preservation. We review the chalenges in 
de-identifying clinical texts and the curent 
metrics for asesing clinical de-identification 
systems. We then introduce thre areas to ex-
plore that can lead to metrics that quantify re-
identification risk and information preserva-
tion. 
1 Introduction

Our curent metrics do not adres the ques-
tions “how god are curent fre-text de-
identification systems”, and “how god do they 
need to be?” We ned measures that quantify risk 
of re-identification based on type and amount of 
personal health identifier (PHI) leakage (PHI terms 
not redacted in the de-identification proces), and 
measures that quantify information preservation or 
readability. 
The metrics in curent use were developed 
originaly for entity extraction (the corect labeling 
of types of phrases in fre text, such as person 
name, date, organization). Entity extraction per-
formance is typicaly measured in terms of preci-
sion, recal and balanced f-measure at both the 
token (word) and phrase level. The top de-
identification systems (Szarvas, Farkas, & Busa-
Fekete, 207; Welner, et al., 207) performed wel 
on these measures, as reported at the first i2b2 De-
identification challenge evaluation (Uzuner, Luo, 
& Szolovits, 207), achieving accuracies of over 
97% token-level f-measure, with recal (sensitivity) 
of over 95%. Over the past several years, these 
results have been extended to more record types 
and record formats; for example, (Friedlin & 
McDonald, 208) reported that their MeDS system 
sucessfuly removed 9.5% of HIPA-specified 
identifiers from HL7 records. These are encourag-
ing numbers, but recal and precision do not tel us 
how good a de-identification system neds to be 
for a particular intended use. 
2 Challenges
in Clinical Text 
Removing PHI from unstructured text poses new 
challenges: in contrast to structured information 
(e.g., fields in a table or a database), we do not 
know in advance where PHI wil apear in a free 
text record, and we do not know what kinds of PHI 
wil ocur. This problem is made more chalenging 
for medical records because the types of record 
vary greatly in content and in amount of PHI – for 
example, a lab report will likely contain very little 
PHI, while a social work note wil be likely to con-
tain much more. 
Medical records have internal structure that is 
dependent on the medical record system and the 
medical record type; there is typically a mix of 
structured fields (e.g., for patient identifier, patient 
name, doctor name), along with unstructured fields 
for fre text. This means that de-identification of 
records must handle a combination of structured 
and unstructured information. The excerpt below 
shows two fre text fields (CLINICAL HISTORY 
and IMPRESION) from a (fictitious) radiology 
72
report, with several types of PHI, including dates, 
locations and ages (shown in bold). 
 
RADIOLOGY REPORT 
CLINICAL HISTORY: Patient is a 4-
year 5-month old male who presnted to 
Oak Valey Health Center on 10/11/2007 
with a cough of 10 days duration and fever. 
Patient lives in a densely populated section 
of Knoxvile. Rule out pneumonia. 
IMPRESION: Scatered lung densities 
likely to represent either scattered atelectasis 
or acute viral ilnes with no definite lobar 
pneumonia identified. 
 
This example ilustrates how PHI is distributed 
in the fre text portions of a medical record. Re-
moving PHI from these free text portions requires 
application of techniques from natural language 
procesing that are capable of identifying phrases 
of specific types based on the lexical content (the 
words that make up the phrases) and the suround-
ing words. 
3 Curent
Methods and Metrics 
Fortunately, the problem of identifying types of 
information in fre text is a well-studied problem 
in the natural language procesing comunity. We 
can leverage several decades of research on infor-
mation extraction and the named entity identifica-
tion prblm i particular, including multiple 
comunity evaluations such as the Message Un-
derstanding Conferences (MUC) (Grishman & 
Sundheim, 196) and the subsequent Automated 
Content Extraction (ACE) evaluations
1
 – both fo-
cused on extraction from newswire -as wel as 
evaluations of biomedical entity extraction from 
the published literature e.g., in the BioCreative 
evaluations (Kralinger, et al., 208). In adition, 
starting in 206, there have ben a series of evalua-
tions for clinical natural language procesing, with 
data sets of clinical records provided by the i2b2 
consortium (Uzuner, et al., 207). It has ben criti-
cally important to have corpora of medical records, 
because medical records represent a very diferent 
style of text compared to news articles or journal 
articles. Medical records are characterized by their 
formulaic and telegraphic style, that is, the use of 
                                                
1
 http:/ww.itl.nist.gov/iad/mig/tests/ace 
phrases or incomplete sentences rather than fluent 
prose, along with heavy use of abbreviations and 
domain-specific terminology (e.g., “93 yo w 
NVD”). The systems developed for newswire or 
for journal articles must be explicitly adapted (or 
trained) to handle the categories required for de-
identification as well as the telegraphic language of 
medical records.  
De-identification of fre text medical records 
consists of two steps: recognition and redaction. 
The phrase recognition stage coresponds to the 
named entity recognition pblm menioed
above, namely the ability to identify a sequence of 
words in runing text that constitutes the mention 
of an entity of a specified type – such as the phrase 
Oak Valey Health Center in the example above. 
For newswire, types of named entities include per-
son, organization, location, time, date, and money; 
for biomedical tasks, entities have included genes, 
proteins, drugs, diseases, etc. For de-identification, 
the critical elements are the 18 types of protected 
health information identified by HIPA,
2
 includ-
ing names, dates, locations, zip codes, phone num-
bers, social security numbers, ages ninety and 
above, URLs and other identifying information. 
Interestingly, most institutions have developed 
their own set of protected clases of information, 
e.g., some institutions distinguish betwen 
DOCTOR and PATIENT identifiers, which both 
fal into the more general HIPA category of 
NAME. 
The techniques used to recognize named enti-
ties in text include: 
• Lexically-based approaches that rely on 
matching words (or phrases) against the 
words or phrases contained in a lexicon; 
• Pattern based approaches that are particu-
larly useful for HIPAA-relevant PHI such as 
telephone numbers, social security numbers, 
dates, etc. 
• Machine learning approaches that are 
based on statistical models of word se-
quences. These approaches require training 
exemplars tht are used to associate se-
quences of words with probabilities of types 
of phrase, e.g., the word(s) following “Dr.” 
or “DR” wil likely be a doctor’s name. 
 
                                                
2
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, 
Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 (1996). 
73
All thre aproaches have ben used and often 
combined (Beckwith, Mahadevan, Balis, & Kuo, 
2006; Berman, 2003; Friedlin & McDonald, 2008; 
Gupta, Saul, & Gilbertson, 204; Morison, Li, 
Lai, & Hripcsak, 209; Szarvas, et al., 207; 
Uzuner, Sibanda, Luo, & Szolovits, 208; Wellner, 
et al., 207) to provide high quality recognition of 
PHI. The 206 i2b2 chalenge evaluation for auto-
matic de-identification of fre text clinical records 
provided an opportunity for groups to benchmark 
their automated de-identification systems against a 
carefuly prepared gold standard corpus of medical 
discharge summaries. The top systems performed 
wel with scores of over 0.97 token-level f-measure 
and recall (sensitivity) of over 0.95 (Uzuner, et al., 
2007). 
4 Toward
New Metrics 
The Uzuner et al. (207) paper concludes with 
two important (and as yet unanswered) questions 
(p. 562): 
 
1. Does succes on this chalenge problem ex-
trapolate to similar performance on other, untested 
data sets? 
 
2. Can health policy makers rely on this level of 
performance to permit automated or semi-
automated disclosure of health data for research 
purposes without undue risk to patients? 
 
We have ben particularly concerned with the 
second question, because it wil be very dificult to 
release automaticaly de-identified data until we 
can provide an answer. The metrics used to date 
have been measures of technolgy performance, 
but they do not addres the key isues of risk of 
PHI exposure and readability/preservation of in-
formation in the de-identified record.  
Recal erors are clearly corelated with risk of 
PHI exposure, but not al recal erors lead to PHI 
exposure. For example, the name “Washington, 
George” might be mistakenly redacted to 
“LOCATION, NAME” leading to both a recal and 
a precision error for the word “Washington” but no 
PHI exposure. Also, some kinds of PHI exposure 
errors contain much more information (e.g., a pa-
tient’s last name) than others (a first name; or a 
telephone extension where the telephone number 
has been redacted). Friedlin and McDonald (208) 
report that MeDS did not mis any ful patient 
identifiers, but it did miss an average of 2.13 pa-
tient identifier fragments per report. However, they 
concluded that none of these fragments were true 
patient identifiers. 
Similarly, precision erors cause mislabeling of 
results and are correlated with los of readability. 
In the extreme case, a system that redacts al words 
would achieve perfect recal, but very low preci-
sion and no information content. A system that 
replaces real PHI with synthetic (fictitious) PHI 
might be more resistant to re-identification because 
it would be difficult for an attacker to distinguish 
real from fictitious information. 
We ned new measures that quantify risk of re-
identification based on type and amount of PHI 
leakage (PHI terms or parts of ters not redacted 
in the de-identification proces); and we ned 
measures that quantify information preservation or 
readability. 
We plan to explore thre areas that may yield 
more useful metrics for de-identification. The first 
is to quantify the re-identification risk through a 
detailed analysis of PHI in difernt record types. 
Given a set of records and a de-identification sys-
tem, we can generate quantitative data on PHI dis-
tribution in different record types, rate of exposure 
of diferent clases of PHI (e.g., names vs. loca-
tions vs. phone numbers), and likelihod of com-
binations of exposed PHI. We can distinguish 
betwen partial exposure of PHI (e.g., just a first 
name or just a rom number), and combinations of 
such exposures within a single record (rom num-
ber and institution provides much more identifying 
information than rom number alone). Using this 
information, we can develop analyses of risk using 
methods developed for structured data 
(Machanavajhala, Kifer, Gehrke, & 
Venkitasubramaniam, 207; Malin, 207; 
Sweney, 202) by combinig statistics from de-
identified records with publicly available informa-
tion (census data, voter registration, etc). 
The second area to explore is how to measure 
information preservation or readbilty. One ap-
proach would be to apply one or more available 
medical information extraction systems such as the 
Mayo Clinic cTAKES system (Savova, Kiper-
Schuler, Buntrock, & Chute, 208) to compare 
information corectly extracted from de-identified 
data vs. original dat. This would provide a rea-
sonable proxy for measuring information loss due 
74
to de-identification. Alternatively, Friedlin and 
McDonald (208) developed a measure of inter-
pretability in their de-identification experiments, 
defined as preserving test type and test results (for 
lab reports) or type of report, specimen and con-
clusion (for pathology reports).  
A third area to explore is protection by hiding 
in plain sight. We can determine the reduction in 
risk from aplying resynthesis (Yeniterzi, et al., 
2010) to de-identified data, which would have the 
effect of hiding exposed PHI in plain sight – since 
such elements would be interspersed with fictitious 
but realistic looking identifiers (particularly 
names) inserted as replacements of PHI. 
5 Conclusion

Curent metrics for de-identification have their 
origins in information extraction; they neither ade-
quately ases the risk of re-identification, nor do 
they provide a god measure of information pres-
ervation. We plan to adres these shortcomings by 
1) applying risk analysis methods derived for 
structured data, 2) using medical extraction sys-
tems to ases information preservation, and 3) 
exploring hiding in plain sight protection by using 
resynthesis to replace identifiers with false by real-
istic fillers. Once we have alternative measures for 
risk of re-identification and information preserva-
tion, we can also explore the corelation of preci-
sion and recal to these new measures. Accurately 
quantifying and balancing risk of re-identification 
and information preservation wil enable health 
policy makers to make beter decisions about the 
use of automated de-identification, and sharing of 
clinical data for research. 
References 
 
Beckwith, B. A., Mahadevan, R., Balis, U. J., & Kuo, 
F. (206). Development and evaluation of an open 
source software tol for deidentification of pathology 
reports. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, 6, 12. 
Berman, J. (203). Concept-Match Medical Data 
Scrubbing. Arch Pathol Lab Med, 127, 680-686. 
Friedlin, F. J., & McDonald, C. J. (208). A software 
tool for removing patient identifying information 
from clinical documents. J Am Med Inform Asoc, 
15(5), 601-610. 
Grishman, R., & Sundheim, B. (196). Mesage 
Understanding Conference 6: A Brief History. Paper 
presented at the 16th International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, Copenhagen. 
Gupta, D., Saul, M., & Gilbertson, J. (204). Evaluation 
of a deidentification (DE-ID) software engine to share 
pathology reports and clinical documents for research. 
Am J Clin Pathol, 121(2), 176-186. 
Kralinger, M., Morgan, A., Smith, L., Leitner, F., 
Tanabe, L., Wilbur, J., Hirschman, L., & Valencia, A. 
(208). Evaluation of text-mining systems for 
biology: overview of the Second BioCreative 
comunity challenge. Genome Biol, 9 Supl 2, S1. 
Machanavajhala, A., Kifer, D., Gehrke, J., & 
Venkitasubramaniam, M. (207). l-diversity: Privacy 
beyond k-anonymity. ACM Transactions on 
Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD), 1(1), 3. 
Malin, B. (207). A computational model to protect 
patient data from location-based re-identification. 
Artif Intel Med, 40(3), 23-239. 
Morison, F. P., Li, L., Lai, A. M., & Hripcsak, G. 
(209). Repurposing the clinical record: can an 
existing natural language procesing system de-
identify clinical notes? J Am Med Inform Asoc, 
16(1), 37-39. 
Savova, G., Kiper-Schuler, K., Buntrock, J., & Chute, 
C. (208). UIMA-based Clinical Information 
Extraction System. Towards Enhanced 
Interoperability for Large HLT Systems: UIMA for 
NLP, 39. 
Sweney, L. (202). k-anonymity: A model for 
protecting privacy. International Journal of 
Uncertainty Fuzines and Knowledge Based Systems, 
10(5), 57-570. 
Szarvas, G., Farkas, R., & Busa-Fekete, R. (207). 
State-of-the-art anoymization of mdical records 
using an iterative machine learning framework. J Am 
Med Inform Asoc, 14(5), 574-580. 
Uzuner, Ö., Luo, Y., & Szolovits, P. (207). Evaluating 
the state-of-the-art in automatic de-identification. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc, 14(5), 50-563. 
Uzuner, Ö., Sibanda, T. C., Luo, Y., & Szolovits, P. 
(208). A de-identifier for medical discharge 
sumaries. Artif Intel Med, 42(1), 13-35. 
Welner, B., Huyck, ., Mardis, S., Aberden, J., 
Morgan, A., Peshkin, L., Yeh, A., Hitzeman, J., & 
Hirschman, L. (207). Rapidly retargetable 
approaches to de-identification in medical records. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc, 14(5), 564-573. 
Yeniterzi, R., Aberden, J., Bayer, S., Welner, B., 
Clark, C., Hirschman, L., & Malin, B. (2010). Efects 
of Personal Identifier Resynthesis on Clinical Text 
De-identification. J Am Med Inform Asoc, 17(2), 
159-168. 
 
 
75

