Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Computational Linguistics in a World of Social Media, pages 11–12,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Modeling Mesage Roles and Influence in Q&A Forums 
 
Jeonhyung Kang and Jihie Kim 
University of Southern California  
Information Sciences Institute 
4676 Admiralty Was, Marina del Rey, CA, U.S.A 
{jeonhyuk, jihie}@isi.edu 
 
Abstract 
We are modeling roles of individual mesages 
and participants in Q&A discusion forums. In 
this paper, we present a mixed network model 
that represents mesage exchanges and mesage 
influences within a discusion thread.  We first 
model individual mesage roles and thread-level 
user roles using discusion content features. We 
then combine the resulting mesage roles and the 
user roles to generate the overal influence net-
work. Mesage influences and their agregation 
over the network are analyzed using B-centrality 
measures.  We use the results in identifying the 
most influential mesage in answering the initial 
question of the thread. 
1 Introduction

Online discusion boards play an important role in 
various fields, including science, politics, and edu-
cation. Understanding paterns of group interac-
tions can be important in many aplications. For 
example, in Q&A forums, some mesages contain 
more useful or influential answers than others. 
Identifying useful content can help future discus-
sions with similar isues. That is, useful informa-
tion on a topic can be sent to related discusions 
(Kim et al., 209). 
There has ben some work on analyzing dia-
logue paterns in online discusion boards (Feng et 
al, 206). Some of these model mesage roles us-
ing dialogue acts such as question act or answer 
act. Most of these focus on modeling individual 
mesages, often using surface forms.  There has 
ben limited study on thread-level modeling of the 
true roles of the mesages, whether they provide 
information (source) or sek information (sink), or 
which mesage in the thread is most useful or in-
fluential as the source. 
In this paper, we present a novel model of mes-
sage influence within a discusion thread. In mod-
eling the thread-level influence of the mesages, 
besides the sink/source role of the individual mes-
sages, we take into acount the roles of the mes-
sage posters within the thread. In Q&A discusion 
threads, since the roles of the posters as an infor-
mation provider or an information seker often do 
not change within the same thread, such informa-
tion can help us identify the true roles or influence 
of the mesages. 
 We combine the mesage roles and the user 
roles with a network model. Mesage influences 
and their agregation over the network are ana-
lyzed using B-centrality measures.  We use the 
resulting influence scores in identifying the most 
influential mesage in answering the initial ques-
tion of the thread. 
2 Modeling
Message Influence 
We use discusion data from an Operating Systems 
course in the Computer Science department at the 
University of Southern California. Students use a 
discusion board, most comonly, to sek help on 
the project asignments. For this study, we use data 
from the Fal 207 semester, with 17 discusion 
threads (randomly chose 133 for training and 44 
for test) with 580 mesages (randomly chose 451 
for training and 129 for test). 
2.1 Sink
and source roles of a mesage 
For each pair of mesages where one is a reply to 
the other, we model the roles of the later, as a sink 
or a source with respect to the former mesage or 
the mesage author. Some mesages, especialy 
long ones, can have both roles. Figure 1 shows an 
influence model of sink and source. A node repre-
sents either a user or a mesage. An edge is either a 
reply-to relation betwen two mesages or an own-
ership of a mesage by a user. The direction of 
each edge indicates the direction of influence. A 
source is a mesage that provides information and 
it generates influence. In the top graph, B responds 
11
to A’s mesage as an information source. A sink 
mesage requests information from others so the 
edge direction goes towards it. Note that sinks and 
sources are diferent from questions and answers 
since some of sources can take a form of a question 
(e.g. have you checked the manual?). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Sink and source role of a mesage 
2.2 Information
seker and information pro-
vider: Thread level roles 
Figure 2 shows an influence model of an informa-
tion seker and an information provider when they 
exchange mesages. The information flows from 
the information provider to the information seker, 
as indicated by the direction of the edges. In gen-
eral, the initial poster seks information and his or 
her role does not usualy change within the thread. 
Without los of generality, we asume that within a 
discusion thread, a user’s role doesn’t change for 
a certain amount of time, although he or she can 
post both Sink and Source mesages, as shown in 
Figure 2.  Using this model, we can capture the 
intention of the mesage based on who posted the 
mesage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Thread-level user intention and mesage roles 
2.3 Mesage
and Participant Role Clasifiers  
Individual mesages were anotated with sink and 
source information. The same mesage can have 
both sink and source roles with respect to the prior 
mesage or its poster. 
The features used include cue phases (n-
grams) and their positions, mesage position in the 
thread, author change information, the relative po-
sition of the mesage in the thread, a user’s partici-
pation frequency (normalized), n-gram of previous 
mesages with their positions and the mesage 
length. The details of these features are described 
in Kim et al (209). 
We used a Suport Vector Machine (Chang 
and Lin 201) to create two binary clasifiers 
(since one mesage can have both roles) that iden-
tify mesage roles: source and sink, and one binary 
clasifier for user roles: information seker and 
information provider. The precisions/recals range 
from 0.89 to 0.96. F-scores are within 0.92-0.93. 
3 Profiling
Influence of Message with Cen-
trality Measures 
We generate a mesage-role graph and a user-role 
graph using the above model, and generate influ-
ence network combining user and mesage roles. 
Mesage influences and their agregation over the 
network are analyzed using B-centrality measures. 
To evaluate our source score acuracy (Ghosh and 
Lerman 209), we anotated the most influential 
source mesage for the initial question (sink) in 
each thread. We use Mean Reciprocal Rank Score 
(MR) to evaluate our results. The combined 
model provides beter results with an MR score 
of 0.90. 
Ranking strategy Information used MR 
Influence Network 
Model score 
User role + msg 
role 
0.90 
Earlier source msg msg role + msg 
location 
0.74 
Earlier msg from info 
providers 
User role + msg 
location 
0.68 
Table 2: MR scores for diferent strategies 
Acknowledgement 
This work was suported by National Science 
Foundation, CLI Phase I (#061859).  
References  
Feng, D. Shaw, E. Kim, J. and Hovy, E. An Inteligent 
Discusion-Bot for Answering Student Queries in 
Threaded Discusions, Proc. of IUI-2006. 
Ghosh, R. and Lerman, K. The structure of heterogeneous 
networks. Proc. of IEE Social Comp. Conf, 209. 
Kim, J., Li, J., and Kim, T. Identifying student online dis-
cusions with unanswered questions,Proc. K-CAP 209. 
12

