Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Second Louhi Workshop on Text and Data Mining of Health Documents, pages 76–83,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
A Comparison of Several Key Information Visualization Systems for 
Secondary Use of Electronic Health Record Content 
 
*Francisco S. Roque
1, Laura Slaughter
2,3, Alexandr Tkatenko
4,5
 
 
1
Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, The Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark 
2
The Interventional Center, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway 
3
Department of Computer and Information Science, Norwegian University of Science and Tech-
nology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway 
4
Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia 
5
Software Technology and Applications Competence Center, Tartu, Estonia 
http:/dsv.su.se/hexanord 
*Al thre authors contributed equaly to this work. 
 
Abstract 
An overview is provided of six information 
visualization systems designed specifically for 
gaining an overview of electronic health re-
cords (EHR). The systems discused all make 
use of timelines: Lifelines, Lifelines2, 
KNAVE I, CLEF Visual Navigator, Time-
line, and AsbruView. With the exception of 
Lifelines2, the main user groups targeted are 
physicians involved in direct patient care. Lit-
tle attention has ben paid towards suporting 
true secondary use of EHR contents, for ac-
tivities such as asesing quality of care, pa-
tient health and safety monitoring, and clinical 
trial recruitment. Future work on such systems 
needs to addres the complexity of EHR data, 
mising and incomplete information, and dif-
ficulties in displaying data with differing lev-
els of granularity. 
1 Introduction

This paper provides an overview of several infor-
mation visualization (infovis) systems that have 
been built for exploring abstracted information 
from Electronic Health Records (EHR). EHRs are 
systems that are used to document care of patients. 
The records can include a wide range of data and 
information, including medications prescribed and 
administered, imunization history, laboratory test 
results, alergies, radiology images, treatment 
plans, and care notes. Curently, most EHR sys-
tems implemented are proprietary and highly cus-
tomized when used by larger care institutions. 
 
It is usualy the case that only clinicians and other 
healthcare profesionals with direct responsibility 
for providing care have aces to patient data. The 
sugestion of secondary use of health data is not 
new and has been handled separately from the is-
sue of creating user interfaces and visualizations. 
Safran et al. discus the purpose of clinical data 
repositories in their white paper and point towards 
the goal of a national framework for the secondary 
use of health data in the U.S. (Safran et al., 207). 
According to their defintion, secondary use in-
cludes activities such as analysis, research, quality 
and safety measurement, public health, payment, 
provider certification and acreditation, marketing, 
and general business applications, while at the 
same time taking into acount the ethical, political, 
technical and social implications of such re-use. De 
Lusignan and van Wel highlight the chalenges of 
making use of clinical data for research, stating, 
"The available research methods for working with 
large data sets are limited; it is difficult to infer 
meaning from data; there is a rapid pace of change 
in both medicine and technology; and integrating 
data without reliable unique identifiers is dificult." 
(de Lusignan and van Wel, 206). Prokosch and 
Ganslandt have recently sumarized the latest ad-
vances in enabling clinical data re-use for research 
purposes (Prokosch and Ganslandt, 209). They 
identify as key challenges the establishment of 
comprehensive clinical data repositories, the estab-
lishment of profesional IT infrastructure to sup-
76
port clinical dat capture, and the integration of 
medical record systems and clinical trial databases. 
As discused in these articles, agregated, ab-
stracted and manipulable information is underutil-
ized and hard to come by. 
 
The emerging field of Visual Analytics (Keim, 
2008) is relevant to this review. This field is focus-
ing on combining related research areas such as 
visualization, data mining and statistics to handle 
large and heterogeneous volumes of data, such as 
EHR. The systems we encountered are integrating 
human judgment with automated analysis, sugest-
ing that future work will be related to handling 
masive amounts of data that contains mising ele-
ments including the results of textual analysi of 
records content. 
1.1 Purpose

Our motivation for creating this overview is to 
compare and discus some of the available infor-
mation visualization/visual analytics tols and how 
are these used for secondary, i.e. for purposes other 
than direct patient care. This is a first step to-
wards infrastructure and cordinating efforts to 
produce systems that are based on standard input 
formats, and met the neds of specificaly defined 
users. The reader of this overview is most likely 
working on information extraction, temporal ab-
straction, and sumarizing EHRs. 
 
Source Search Keywords  
Pubmed visualization 
health records 
Medical Records Systems, Computerized 
Computer Graphics 
User-Computer Interface 
ACM DL electronic health records or medical record 
information visualization or visualization 
healthcare or health care 
user interface 
IEE DL visualization 
medical records 
Google 
Scholar 
electronic medical records or EHR 
information visualization 
visual analytics 
Table 1. Keywords searched. 
1.2 Scope

The review is non-systematic. We didn't expect to 
find large numbers of articles, since this is a rela-
tively narow area of interest. The search was con-
fined to user interfaces and visualizations for EHR 
data, we searched pubmed, ACM digital library, 
IEE library, and Google Scholar, using basic 
keywords and checked references in found articles. 
We also loked for papers on work we had read or 
known about previously from conferences or other 
sources. The literature search covered articles in 
English only. Keywords used are listed in Table 1.  
2 Systems

In this section, we give an overview of the state-of-
the-art systems related to visualization of temporal 
information in EHRs. Our intention is to cover 
broad areas of application including representation 
of medical histories, visual data query and aggre-
gation, generation of temporal abstractions and 
visualization of treatment plans. Due to the limita-
tions in space, we focus only on the most represen-
tative systems, which feature interesting and 
potentialy reusable visualization techniques. 
 
Lifelines 
LifeLines uses a timeline visualization technique to 
represent personal histories, medical records and 
other types on biographical dat (Plaisant et al., 
1996). In LifeLines, horizontal bars are used to 
depict temporal duration and location of events on 
a horizontal time axis. Similar events are organized 
into facets, which can be expanded and collapsed 
to provide increasing or decreasing level of detail. 
Color notations and line thickness are used to indi-
cate the importance and relationship of events. To 
handle regions with high data density, LifeLines 
provides zooming functionality alowing users to 
compress and stretch the time scale at any location. 
Additional content (e.g., multimedia) can be added 
in a linked fashion. Authors aply LifeLines in the 
analysis of complex patient medical records to 
visualize temporal relationships betwen treat-
ments, consultations, disorders, prescriptions, hos-
pitalizations and other events. 
 
Lifelines2 
LifeLines2 (Wang et al., 208) is an extension of 
LifeLines, allowing the user to analyze records 
from ultiple patients at a time. The system facili-
tates comparative visualization of records by 
77
means of aligning, filtering and sorting operations. 
By aligning patient records on some comon ref-
erence event (e.g., the first heart attack), users can 
easily spot co-occurring and neighboring events. 
Ranking and filtering operations complement 
alignment by interactively reordering or narrowing 
the set of records to suit a user’s changing focus. 
The system proved to be particularly suitable for 
observational research, where researchers analyze 
data from diferent studies in order to beter under-
stand health problems or study the efect of treat-
ments, and in finding patients for clinical trials. 
Evaluation studies showed that the system signifi-
cantly simplifies typical analytical tasks and that 
medical specialists can quickly learn the interface. 
LifeLines2 is curently used to display EHR data 
provided by the Informatics for Integrating Biol-
ogy & the Bedside (i2b2) Project (Murphy et al., 
2006). 
 
While in LifeLines2 the main focus is on visualiz-
ing temporal ordering of events, Wang et al. em-
phasizes practical need in viewing multiple records 
as an aggregate in order to study frequency of 
event data over time (Wang et al., 209). For in-
stance, a user might be interested to analyze blod 
presure of al patients who have had an open-heart 
surgery within 3 months of their first heart atack. 
As a solution, authors complement LifeLines2 
framework with a new visualization technique, 
called temporal sumaries, which represents dis-
tributional trends of events over a set of records in 
a histogram-like chart. Furthermore, the system 
allows splitting the whole datset of records into 
multiple subsets and use temporal sumaries to 
compare event patterns betwen these groups. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Lifelines2 main window, with focus on 
timelines. 
 
 
CLEF 
Halet (Halet, 208) proposes a visualization ar-
chitecture for browsing medical histories, which 
integrates visual navigation tols and automaticaly 
generated textual sumaries. While the graphical 
interface facilitates interactive navigation, textual 
descriptions can, in addition, convey complex tem-
poral information and display details that would 
otherwise be to complex for visualization compo-
nents. Within the system, the patient’s medical his-
tory is represented as a network of semanticaly 
and temporally organized events, which serves as 
an input for visualization and natural language 
generation components. The visual navigator de-
picts a high level overview of a patient’s medical 
history by plotting events along thre paralel time-
lines, corresponding to diagnoses, treatments and 
investigations. In adition to zoming time scale 
and detail-on-demand functionality, the navigator 
provides interactive visualization of semantical 
relationships betwen events (e.g., caused-by, has-
locus, indicated-by, etc.). Having diferent features 
from the LifeLines interface, the navigator also 
allows the user to visualize numerical data (e.g., 
results of blod tests) by ploting results of meas-
urements on separate line charts. Natural language 
generation is used for two purposes: 1) to create 
customized textual reports for printing or exchange 
purposes and 2) as a support tool for the visual 
navigator, to enable better description of complex 
events and relationships betwen them. 
 
KNAVE-II 
KNAVE-II (Goren-Bar et al., 204) is an interface 
enabling knowledge-based visualization and inter-
active exploration of time-oriented data at diferent 
levels of temporal abstractions (e.g., abstraction of 
periods of bone marow toxicity from raw individ-
ual hematological data). Users can nagate 
through the links of a semantic network while si-
multaneously navigating visualy through multiple 
degres of temporal abstraction of the dataset un-
der observation. The evaluation results have shown 
that users of KNAVE-II were able to perform que-
ries both faster and more acurately than with other 
standard tols. 
 
78
 
Figure 2. The Knave-II system. 
 
TimeLine 
The TimeLine system (Bui et al., 207) is a prob-
lem-centric temporal visualization of patient re-
cords. The contents of the EHR are integrated, 
reorganized, and displayed within the user inter-
face (UI) along a timeline. It is similar to Lifelines 
in the way that the different elements of the EHR 
are grouped along the y-axis: imaging, reports, lab 
tests, etc are collapsible categories. However, un-
like Lifelines, the TimeLine system uses an XML 
data representation to handle data from distributed, 
heterogeneous medical databases. Data elements 
that are displayed in the UI are clasified based on 
a knowledge base that guides both data inclusion 
rules and the visualization metaphors used to ren-
der the data. 
 
 
Figure 3. TimeLine system. 
 
ASBRUVIEW 
AsbruView (Kosara and Miksch, 201) is a visu-
alization and user interface on top of Asbru lan-
guage (Shahar et al., 196) designed to represent 
treatment procedures as structured time-oriented 
plans. AsbruView represents hierarchical and tem-
poral relationships betwen treatment plans using a 
3D visualization perspective. Plans are aligned 
along the time axis and can be stacked on top of 
each other and laid out in diferent ways. To sim-
plify the interface, all graphic elements are repre-
sented by wel-known real world objects (e.g., 
track, trafic light, etc.). Also a 2D view is avail-
able which focuses on temporal aspects of plans in 
greater detail. To depict uncertainty of future 
events, AsbruView extends the timeline by using 
time anotation glyphs (Chuah, 197). 
3 Comparisons

Infovis techniques are a way of augmenting human 
cognitive capabilities, to help humans find patterns 
in large volumes of data. The systems described 
above target specific user types that wil benefit 
from the visualization methods. While some user 
interfaces were developed in close dialog with 
medical practitioners, like Lifelines2 and Knave-II, 
others, such as the first Lifelines, Clef and Asbru-
view have had only minimal input from their in-
tended audience. 
3.1 Users, Goals and Tasks 
Most of the tols were directed at clinicians and 
clinical practice, although they were not always 
developed in close relation to them. Table 2 gives 
an overview of intended users for each of the 
named systems, and their proposed goals/tasks. 
From the user point of view, a number of tasks and 
goals can be defined for each tool. Some are very 
specific and tend to care for niche usages, while 
others provide more general visualization methods 
that can be aplied to a number of situations. 
 
System Users, Goals, Tasks 
Lifelines Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Use EHR content in temporal time-based view 
Lifelines2 Clinical researchers 
 Research 
 Compare paterns of events, detecting trends 
CLEF Clinician, Biomedical researcher 
 Patient care 
 Visualize timelines, use NLP to extract com-
plex temporal data, aggregate numerical data 
KNAVE-II Clinician 
79
 Patient care 
 Generation and exploration of context sensitive 
abstractions of temporal data 
TimeLine Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Use EHR content in temporal time-based view, 
with aditional filters on data based on NLP 
techniques 
AsbruView Clinician 
 Patient care 
 Medical therapy planning and execution 
Table 2. Users, Goals, Tasks. 
 
These systems were designed with input from only 
a few medical personel involved in the project. In 
general, articles we read concernig these systems 
that have a more guided development proces, i.e. 
closely related with physicians, have more specific 
goals and tasks, because they were designed with 
these in mind. Visualizing data for decision-
making and analyzing treatment outcome is often a 
general goal in many of the tools developed in in-
teraction with medical staf (Aigner and Miksch, 
2006; Mamykina et al., 2004; Portet, 2009). There 
is an emphasis on pre-procesed patient data, spe-
cifically numeric, such as lab tests, heart rate, and 
blood presure. Systems mainly try to help physi-
cians answer questions about corelations in the 
patient's data, and provide a means for suporting 
quick decision-making making when combining 
several types of highly heterogeneous data. Physi-
cians can folow a specific treatment plan and 
check the patient's physiological variables over 
time. This also enables the practitioner to check the 
influence of certain variables in the treatment 
proces and change the protcol if neded. CLEF, 
for example, alows the physician to discover 
events during specific time spans, such as search-
ing for past specific liver problems. Lifelines2 is 
specificaly geared towards research uses and to-
wards answering complex queries. In Lifelines2, a 
case study involved verifying the results of a clini-
cal study with real-life EHR data to se if clinical 
care data difer from the study results. 
 
The systems we discus have conducted evaluation 
studies as a part of the end-stages of development. 
The Lifelines evaluations were conducted in an-
other domain (use of pattern searching related to 
monitoring graduate student progres), with limited 
interviews and input from experts in the medical 
domain. The KNAVE system conducted a cross-
over study with doctors, comparing KVAVE with 
existing tols. TimeLine was evaluated following 
the development of the interface by five radiolo-
gistsfocusing on questions related to data integra-
tion and the temporal display. Asbruview was 
evaluated using questionaires sent to clinicians. 
3.2 Visualization
Methods 
The focus of this paper is on temporal visualization 
methods since this has ben the primary visualiza-
tion type studied for aiding humans in organizing 
and exploring patterns in abstracted EHR content. 
All the systems that are compared in this paper 
display some type of timeline with time runing 
from the left part the scren to the right, time being 
on the x-axis, and categories of events along the y-
axis. Various techniques for graphically represent-
ing specific events are used (e.g. icons, shapes), 
AsbruView makes use of 3D, while all the others 
are flat 2D.  
 
Infovis has ben the keyword used to describe 
these systems, with the idea of presenting a method 
for human users (most often stated as being clini-
cians), to recognize patterns and thereby "amplify 
cognition" (Chitaro, 206). Other methods for 
recognizing paterns in EHR for secondary use are 
purely automated and conducted through data min-
ing techniques.  Bertini and Lalane (209) wrote 
about the complementary role of automatic data 
analysis and visualization in knowledge discovery. 
They discus "visual analytics", an outgrowth of 
infovis that can be sen as an integrated aproach 
combining visualization, human factors, and data 
analysis. They sugest 4 categories for classifying 
approaches: Pure Visualization (VIS), Computa-
tionally-enhanced Visualization (V+), Visually 
enhanced Mining (M+), and Integrated Visualiza-
tion and ining (V). In the systems we have 
compared, there is a spectrum of ideas about how 
to visualize EHR contents, including movements 
towards "enhanced" or "intelligence" in the proc-
essing of the underlying EHR data. In Lifelines2, 
the data visualized was obtained from anonymized 
EHRs though coperation with the i2b2 Project 
(Murphy et al., 206) The input form of the data is 
a simple 3-column table containing "ID", "Event 
Type", and "Time".  Each ID can have multiple 
events happening at various times. Lifelines2 al-
lows sorting of the data so that records with the 
80
most incidents of one type of event are shown at 
the top of the scren. This type of infovis relies on 
human patern recognition only and would be con-
sidered as "VIS" by Bertini and Lalane (209). In 
the CLEF project, the CLEF Chronicle, which un-
derlies the visualizations, is a semantic network 
modeling of what hapened to the patient, why, 
and how. Semantic relations are: causality, reason, 
finding, and consequence. The types of events 
modeled are: problem, investigation, and treat-
ment. The CLEF Visual Navigator might be con-
sidered as "V+", computationaly enhanced 
visualization because some sort of automated com-
putation supports the visualization. In CLEF, the 
visual display is "enhanced with visual techniques 
for highlighting relationships betwen events on 
the timeline." None of the systems so far that we 
have sen, would qualify as "visualy enhanced 
mining" or "integrated visualization and mining." 
Table 3 provides a ful overview for al systems 
reviewed. 
 
System Cate-
gory 
Notes 
Lifelines VIS  
Lifelines 2 VIS  
CLEF V++ • automated generation of 
sumaries 
• semantic network of EHR 
record events 
KNAVE-II V++ • semantic (ontology-based) 
navigation and exploration 
of the data 
• knowledge base is used to 
interpet raw data 
TimeLine V++ • data mapping and reor-
ganization 
• content-based techniques 
to elucidate predominant 
subject of reports for clas-
sification 
AsbruView VIS  
Table 3. Visual Analytics of Systems using Bertini and 
Lalane’s (209) clasification. 
 
The papers we have read that cover EHR visualiza-
tion, as sen in the systems presented, express the 
complexity of abstracted EHR data. Mising and 
inconsistent data, dealing with hierarchical data, 
and problems with granularity are all concerns that 
become readily apparent through attempting to 
build infovis systems. Wang (208) sumed it up 
best "Clinical data tend to be mesy with aspects 
that become only obvious when the data is visual-
ized. The same heart attack might be recorded 
thre times in thre days (by the emergency room 
physician, a cardiologist, and a clerk from the bill-
ing ofice) and it can be hard to differentiate it 
from 3 separate events. Even if medical event in-
formation is carefuly recorded at the time of the 
doctor visit or during a hospitalization, the time 
stamp is usualy inacurate by nature." Futre 
work on visualizations needs to adequately address 
the complexity of the data rather than work with 
test data that is too simplistic.  
3.3 Text
Mining Tasks 
All mentioned systems, except the CLEF and 
TimeLine, operate with readily available lists of 
typeand time-taged events. However, clinical 
records are often stored in textual form what makes 
them inaccessible for machine procesing. Text 
mining techniques need to be applied to automati-
cally transform textual data into structured, nor-
malized form. Key tasks involve event extraction, 
classification and normalization. 
 
The CLEF system uses an advanced information 
extraction engine to identify pre-defined clases of 
entities (e.g. diseases, investigations, problems, 
drugs, etc.) and semantic relationships betwen 
them (e.g. investigation indicates problem) in natu-
ral language texts. The information extraction 
proces involves lexical and terminolgical analy-
sis, syntactic and semantic analysis, and discourse 
analysis. To adress the complexity of medical 
language, the system makes use of language re-
sources including the Unified Medical Language 
System and the Gene Ontology. Extracted informa-
tion is stored in templates, which can be queued or 
used to generate textual summaries. The TimeLine 
system makes use of both textual contents of the 
EHR as wel as numerical data and codes. An 
NLP-based system is used in conjunction with the 
TimeLine UI, for example, performing section 
analysis in radiology reports to determine whether 
specific subsections exist within the reports that 
are related to certain medical problems (Bui et al. 
2007). 
 
 
81
4 Conclusions

The infovis systems analyzed alow secondary use 
of EHR content data especialy aimed at clinicians 
documenting patient care. Al of them are focused 
on visualizing temporal data in a timeline, while 
displaying specific events from the patient data. 
 
Although directed at medical practitioners in their 
daily patient care routine, they were not always 
developed with user fedback. Evaluation of the 
diferent tools was often based on situations out-
side of the clinical seting, and might not reflect 
reality. A more intimate dialog with clinicians 
would benefit the creation of targeted systems ad-
dresing specific needs of the medical community. 
 
The overal goal of these tols is to present users 
temporal information contained in a record, im-
proving their ability to recognize paterns for 
knowledge discovery and following treatment. 
They introduce simple visualization tols, but 
some include automated computational enhance-
ments suporting it.  
 
EHR contain mising and inconsistent data, which 
is in general mesy. Due to the complexity of the 
underlying data, future work neds to adres these 
intricacies rather than using simplistic approaches. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We would like to thank Nordforsk and the Nordic 
Council of Ministers for the funding of our re-
search network HEXAnord Health text Analysis 
network in the Nordic and Baltic countries. This 
work was partially suported by a grant from the 
Vilum Kan Rasmusen fund.  
References 
Aigner, W., Miksch, S., 206. CareVis: integrated 
visualization of computerized protocols and temporal 
patient data. Artif Intell Med 37, 18. 
Bertini, E., Lalane, D., 209. Surveying the 
complementary role of automatic data analysis and 
visualization in knowledge discovery, Procedings of 
the ACM SIGKD Workshop on Visual Analytics and 
Knowledge Discovery: Integrating Automated Analysi 
with Interactive Exploration. ACM, Paris, France, p. 
12-20. 
Bui, A., Aberle, D.R., Kangarlo, H., 207. TimeLine: 
Visualizing Integrated Patient Records. IEE Transac-
tions on Information Technology in Biomedicine 1(4): 
462-473. 
Chitaro, L., 206. Visualization of patient data at 
diferent temporal granularities on mobile devices, AVI 
'06: Procedings of the working conference on 
Advanced visual interfaces, p. ACM--487. 
Chuah, M.a.E., S., 197. Glyphs for software 
visualization. 5th International Workshop on Program 
Comprehension (IWPC ’97) Procedings, 183-191. 
de Lusignan, S., van Wel, C., 2006. The use of 
routinely colected computer data for research in 
primary care: opportunities and chalenges. Fam Pract 
23, -263. 
Goren-Bar, D., Shar, Y., Galperin-Aizenberg, M., 
Boaz, D., Tahan, G., 204. KNAVE I: the definition 
and implementation of an intelligent tol for 
visualization and exploration of time-oriented clinical 
data, AVI '04: Procedings of the working conference 
on Advanced visual interfaces, pp. ACM--174. 
Halet, C., 208. Multi-modal presentation of medical 
histories, IUI '08: Procedings of the 13th international 
conference on Intelligent user interfaces, p. ACM--89. 
Keim, D.A., Mansman, F., Schneidewind, J., Thomas, 
J., Ziegler, H., 208. Visual analytics: Scope and 
challenges. Visual Data Mining: Theory, Techniques 
and Tols for Visual Analytics, Springer, 76-90. 
Kosara, R., Miksch, S., 201. Metaphors of movement: 
a visualization and user interface for time-oriented, 
skeletal plans. Artif Intel Med 2, 11-131. 
Mamykina, L., Gose, S., Hedqvist, D., Beard, D.V., 
2004. CareView: analyzing nursing naratives for 
temporal trends, CHI '04: CHI '04 extended abstracts on 
Human factors in computing systems, p. ACM--1150. 
Murphy, S.N., Mendis, M.E., Berkowitz, D.A., Kohane, 
I., Chueh, H.C., 206. Integration of clinical and genetic 
data in the i2b2 architecture. AMIA nnu Symp Proc. 
Plaisant, C., Milash, B., Rose, A., Widof, S., 
Shneiderman, B., 196. LifeLines: Visualizing Personal 
Histories, CHI, p. -227. 
82
Portet, F., Reiter, E., Gat, A., Skyes, C., 209. 
Automatic generation of textual sumaries from 
neonatal intensive care data. Artificial Inteligence, 789-
816. 
Prokosch, H.U., Ganslandt, T., 209. Perspectives for 
medical informatics. Reusing the electronic medical 
record for clinical research. Methods Inf Med 48, -44. 
Safran, C., Blomrosen, M., Hamond, W.E., Labkof, 
S., Markel-Fox, S., Tang, P.C., Detmer, D.E., Panel, E., 
2007. Toward a national framework for the secondary 
use of health data: an American Medical Informatics 
Association White Paper. J Am Med Inform Assoc 14, -
9. 
Shahar, Y., Miksch, S., Johnson, P., 196. An intention-
based language for representing clinical guidelines. Proc 
AMIA Annu Fal Symp, 592-596. 
Wang, T.D., Plaisant, C., Quin, A.J., Stanchak, R., 
Murphy, S., Shneiderman, B., 208. Aligning temporal 
data by sentinel events: discovering paterns in 
electronic health records, CHI '08: Proceeding of the 
twenty-sixth anual SIGCHI conference on Human 
factors in computing systems, p. ACM--466. 
Wang, T.D., Plaisant, C., Shneiderman, B., Spring, N., 
Roseman, D., Marchand, G., Mukherje, V., Smith, M., 
2009. Temporal Summaries: Supporting Temporal 
Categorical Searching, Agregation and Comparison. 
IEE_J_VCG 15, -1056. 
 
 
83

