Proceedings of the 11th Meeting of the ACL-SIGMORPHON, ACL 2010, pages 63–71,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15 July 2010. c 2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Toward a Totally Unsupervised, Language-Independent Method for the
Syllabification of Written Texts
Thomas Mayer
DepartmentofLinguistics
UniversityofKonstanz,Germany
thomas.mayer@uni-konstanz.de
Abstract
Unsupervisedalgorithmsfortheinduction
of linguistic knowledge should at best re-
quire as few basic assumptions as pos-
sible and at the same time in principle
yieldgoodresultsforanylanguage. How-
ever,mostofthetimesuchalgorithmsare
only tested on a few (closely related) lan-
guages. In this paper, an approach is pre-
sented that takes into account typological
knowledge in order to induce syllabic di-
visions in a fully automatic manner based
onreasonably-sizedwrittentexts. Ourap-
proachisabletoaccountforsyllablestruc-
turesoflanguageswhereotherapproaches
would fail, thereby raising the question
whethercomputationalmethodscanreally
beclaimedtobelanguage-universalwhen
theyarenottestedonthevarietyofstruc-
turesthatarefoundinthelanguagesofthe
world.
1 Introduction
Many approaches developed in the field of com-
putationallinguisticsareonlytestedandoptimized
foronelanguage(mostlyEnglish)orasmallsetof
closelyrelatedlanguages,butatthesametimeare
often claimed to be applicable to any natural lan-
guage,cf. Bender(2009). Ouraimistostressthe
importanceofhavingamorevariedsampleoflan-
guagesthatincludethedifferenttypesthatcanbe
foundinthelanguagesoftheworldinordertodo
justicetotherangeofvariationinlinguisticstruc-
tures across languages. Furthermore, we want to
pointtotheusefulnessofusingtypologicalknowl-
edgeforalanguage-universalapproach.
In this paper, we present an unsupervised,
language-independent syllabification method
based on raw unannotated texts in a phonemic
transcription. The methods and procedures
presented in this work rest upon insights from
typological work and do not need any additional
language-dependent information. The main pur-
poseofthispaperisnottopresentanimprovement
on already established statistical approaches to
the problem of syllabification of an individual
language, but to introduce data from languages
that might constitute a problem for many syl-
labification methods that have been optimized
on languages like English and therefore make it
necessary to integrate an additional component
thatisabletohandlesuchcases.
Theremainderofthepaperisorganizedasfol-
lows. First, it is argued in Section 2 that ortho-
graphictexts(inanyalphabeticscript)canbeused
for the induction of phonological patterns if the
spellingsystemisreasonablyclosetoaphonemic
transcription. The syllabification process can be
divided into two steps. In Section 3, we present
and evaluate an algorithm for an unsupervised
classificationofallsymbolsintheinputtextsinto
vowels and consonants. Based on this classifica-
tion, a syllabification procedure is discussed that
makes use of distributional information of clus-
ters in order to break up vowel and consonant se-
quences into syllables (Section 4). Finally, we
conclude with a discussion of the advantages and
disadvantages of the present approach and its im-
plicationsforfutureresearch.
2 Learning
phonological patterns on the
basis of written texts?
Most studies that are based on original texts are
concerned with research questions that do not
make use of phonological knowledge that has
been extracted from the texts. The reason for
this is obvious. The orthographies of many well-
studied modern languages contain many idiosyn-
craticrulesandexceptionsthatwouldmakeitdif-
ficult to use them for dealing with phonological
aspects of the languages under consideration. On
63
theotherhand,inordertobeabletousedistribu-
tionalinformationforphonologicalproblemsthere
arenotenoughreasonably-sizedphoneticallytran-
scribed corpora, especially for a wider range of
languages.
However, many spelling systems do not suffer
fromtheseshortcomingsandthuscanbeusedfor
thesepurposes. Whenlookingatlanguageswhose
orthographies have been conceived or standard-
izedonlyrecentlyitcanbenotedthatmanyofthem
are pretty close to a phonemic transcription. Pro-
videdthesizeofthecorpusisbigenough,smaller
inconsistenciesinthespellingsystemcanbecon-
sideredtobenoiseinthedata.
Phonemicorthographiesastheyareusuallyde-
vised for a new spelling system also show an ad-
vantage that phonetic transcriptions lack, namely
that they already group together those symbols
thatrepresentthesamephonemeinthelanguage. 1
Moreover,obligatoryphonologicalprocessessuch
asfinaldevoicingaremostlynotrepresentedinthe
written form (Turkish being a notable exception),
therebyprovidingasortofunderlyingrepresenta-
tion that is useful to induce which sequences can
begroupedtogethertomorphemes.
For these reasons written texts can in our view
also be used for the induction of phonological
knowledge for languages with phonemic spelling
systems,eventhoughtheirresultshavetobeana-
lyzedwithgreatcare.
3 Sukhotin’s algorithm
Sukhotin’s algorithm (Sukhotin, 1962, 1973) is a
totallyunsupervisedmethodtodiscriminatevow-
els from consonants on the basis of a phonemic
transcription. The approach relies on two fun-
damental assumptions that are grounded on typo-
logical insights. First, vowels and consonants in
words tend to alternate rather than being grouped
together. Second,themostfrequentsymbolinthe
corpus is a vowel. The latter assumption is used
toinitializetheclassificationstepbyclaimingthat
the most frequent symbol is the first member of
the vowel class, with the rest of the symbols ini-
tiallyallclassifiedasconsonants. Withthehelpof
thefirstassumptiontheothervowelsarethenclas-
sifiedbyiterativelycheckingwhichsymbolisless
1 Intheremainderofthispaperwewillusetheterm’sym-
bol’asamoreneutralexpressionforalllettersinthewritten
texts in order not to be explicit whether the spelling system
really lives up to the goal of representing phonemes by let-
ters.
frequentlyadjacenttothealreadydetectedvowels.
3.1 Typological
basis
It has been noticed in the typological literature at
leastsinceJakobsonandHalle(1956)thatthereis
a tendency in the languages of the world for hav-
ing CV as the basic syllable structure. Of course,
languagesdifferastothenumberandtypesofsyl-
lables;therearelanguagesthatallowahugevari-
etyofconsonant(orvowel)clusterswhereasothers
arestricterintheirphonotacticpossibilities. How-
ever,alllanguagesseemtoobeytheuniversallaw
thatCVismorebasicthanothersyllabletypesand
that ”CV is the only universal model of the sylla-
ble.” Evidence for this comes from different ar-
eas of linguistics, including the observation that
nomatterhowsmallthenumberofsyllabletypes
in a language is, it always includes CV. This is
also reflected in the Onset Maximization Princi-
ple (OMP), which states that an intervocalic con-
sonantisattributedtothefollowingsyllableandis
assumed to be a language-universal principle for
syllabification.
We are not aware of any cross-linguistic study
thatinvestigatedthetokenfrequencyofphonemes
in larger samples of texts. Hence, the second as-
sumption that the most frequent symbol in a text
is always a vowel cannot be backed up by typo-
logical knowledge. However, this claim can be
supported indirectly. In his study on consonant-
vowel ratios in 563 languages, Maddieson (2008)
states that the ratio ranges between 1.11 and 29.
Thelowestvaluehasbeencalculatedfortheisolate
language Andoke, which has 10 consonants and
9 vowels. The mean value is 4.25, though. Pro-
videdthatitisalwaysthecasethatlanguageshave
moreconsonantsthanvoweltypes,itcanbeargued
that the fewer vowels have higher token frequen-
ciesinordertobeabletocontributetheirshareto
themake-up ofsyllables. 2 Yetthisgeneralization
isuntestedandcouldbewrongforsomelanguages
(orrathercorporaofthoselanguages). Inoursam-
pleoftextsindifferentlanguages,neverthelessthe
mostfrequentsymbolisalwaysavowel.
3.2 Description
of the algorithm
Sukhotin’s algorithm is computationally simple
and can even be illustrated with a small toy cor-
2 IntheFrenchcorpusthatGoldsmithandXanthos(2009)
usedintheirstudies,themostfrequentphonemeturnedoutto
beaconsonant. However,therestoftheclassificationwasnot
affectedandallremainingphonemeswerelabelledcorrectly.
64
pus. 3 Givenacorpuswiththeinventoryof nsym-
bols S := {s1,...,sn}weconstructan n×nma-
trix M where the rows represent the first and the
columnsthesecondsymbolinabigramsequence
and which indicates the number of times the se-
quencesoccurinthecorpus.
M =


m11 ... m1n
... ... ...
mn1 ... mnn


The main diagonal, i.e., the self-succession of
symbols, is ignored by setting all its values to
zero. For instance, given a sample corpus C =
{saat,salat,tal,last,stall,lese,seele} we ob-
tain the following 5 × 5 matrix (for ease of un-
derstandingthesymbolshavebeenputinfrontof
thecellsofthematrixandtherowsumsinthelast
column):
M =





s a t l e Sum
s 0 3 2 0 3 8
a 3 0 3 4 0 10
t 2 3 0 0 2 7
l 0 4 0 0 3 7
e 3 0 2 3 0 8





Sukhotin’salgorithminitiallyconsidersallsym-
bolstobeconsonantsbeforeitentersaninterative
phase. Ineachcycleofthephase,thesymbolwith
the highest row sum greater than zero is detected
and classified as a vowel. The row sum for any
symbol sa is calculated by adding up all occur-
rencesofthesymbol sa asafirstorsecondmem-
ber in a sequence ∑ni=1 mai. After a new vowel
has been detected, its row sum is set to zero and
allotherrowsumsareupdatedbysubtractingfrom
thesumoftherowofeachremainingsymboltwice
thenumberoftimesitoccursnexttothenew-found
vowel. Thisprocessisrepeateduntilnomoresym-
bolswithpositiverowsumsareleft. Inourexam-
ple,thevectorsofrowsums( RSum)forallsym-
bols in the individual steps of the iteration phase
lookasfollows:
RSum1 =
( s a t l e
8 10 7 7 8
)
RSum2 =
( s a t l e
2 0 1 −1 8
)
3 More
detailed descriptions can be found in Guy (1991)
andGoldsmithandXanthos(2009).
RSum3 =
( s a t l e
−4 0 −3 −7 0
)
Therationalebehindthisalgorithmwithrespect
toitsbasicassumptionsisasfollows. Thefactthat
initiallythesymbolwiththehighestsumisconsid-
ered to be a vowel reflects the idea that the most
frequent symbol in the corpus has to be a vowel.
What the row sums after each step actually con-
tainisthedifferencebetweenthenumberoftimes
asymbolisfoundnexttoaconsonantandthenum-
ber of times it is found next to a vowel. When-
everanewvowelhasbeendetectedalloccurrences
ofthisvowelhavetobesubtractedfromtheother
symbolsbecausethissymbolisnolongerconsid-
eredtobeaconsonant.
3.3 Evaluation
To the best of our knowledge, the algorithm has
neverbeentestedonalargercross-linguisticsam-
ple. There are results for a number of languages
in Sukhotin’s original papers, in Sassoon (1992)
andin GoldsmithandXanthos(2009), yetalmost
alllanguagesinthosesamplesbelongtotheIndo-
European family (except for Georgian, Hungar-
ian and Finnish) or do not fulfill the criterion of
a phonemic transcription (Hebrew). It therefore
still needs to be tested on a more cross-linguistic
sample of languages. In particular, it is an inter-
estingquestiontoseeifthealgorithmworkseven
for those languages that are notorious for having
manyconsonantclusters. Onthebasisofhissam-
ple of five languages, Sassoon (1992) comes to
the conclusion that it works very well on those
languages that have only few consonant clusters
buthasproblemswhenmorecomplexclustersare
involved. However, he also notices that this ef-
fect disappears with larger text samples. Table 1
providesanevaluationofSukhotin’salgorithmon
the basis of Bible texts (NT) in our sample of 39
languages. The size of the corpora in Sassoon’s
samplerangefrom1641to3781characterswhile
the Bible texts contain more than 100,000 char-
acters (e.g., English has 716,301 characters). On
average, Sukhotin’s algorithm classifies 95.66%
of the symbols correctly. However, this percent-
age also includes those languages which do not
fulfill the criterion of having a suitable phonemic
writing system (e.g., Russian, English, German,
French). When looking only at those languages
whose spelling systems are close to a phonemic
transcription(orwherethedigraphshavebeensub-
65
stituted by single symbols), the results are even
better.
Misclassifiedsymbolsareeitherveryinfrequent
and happen to occur next to symbols of the same
classorarepartofoneofthedigraphsusedinthe
spelling system of the language. In the Maltese
case,thesymbol î isclassifiedasaconsonantbe-
causeitonlyoccurstwiceinthecorpusintheword
eloî whereitstandsnexttoasymbolthatisclearly
avowel. Forsomelanguages,minormodifications
totheoriginaltextshavebeenmadeinordertore-
place the most frequent digraphs. In Swahili, for
instance,withtheofficialorthographythesymbol
c is classified as a vowel because it only occurs
in the digraph ch . After the digraph has been re-
placedbyasinglesymbol,theclassificationiscor-
rect in all cases. Sometimes a symbol (e.g., h in
Warlpiri)ismisclassifiedbecauseitdoesnotoccur
inthewritingsystemofthelanguagebutispartof
a digraph in foreign words (mostly proper names
ofpeopleorlocationsintheBibletexts). Another
problemoftheapproachiswithorthographiesthat
use the same symbol for both vowels and conso-
nants. Since the classification is global, symbols
like English y, which is a consonant in yoghurt
andavowelin lady ,arealwaystreatedaseithera
voweloraconsonantforthewholelanguageinde-
pendent of the context where they occur. There-
fore symbols in the input text should always be
abletobeclassifiedtooneortheothercategory.
As the discussion of misclassified symbols
shows,themainerrorsintheresultsarenotdueto
the algorithm itself, but a problem of the spelling
systems of the texts at hand. Our results confirm
the findings of Sassoon (1992) that the algorithm
issensitivetothecorpussizeandthefrequencyof
occurrenceofindividualsymbols. Largercorpora,
such as Bible texts, yield much better results for
theselanguages. Eventhoselanguageswithmany
and very complex consonant clusters (e.g., Geor-
gian, Croatian and Czech) get an almost perfect
classification. Itisremarkablethattheoveralldis-
tributionofthesymbolsmakesupforthosecases
whereconsonantsfrequentlyoccurinclusters. Ex-
periments with smaller corpus sizes also revealed
thatoneofthefirstsymbolsthatgetwronglyclas-
sifiedisthesibilant s. Thismightbeanotherindi-
catorfortheexceptionalstatusofsibilantswithre-
specttosyllabificationandtheiroccurrenceincon-
sonantsequenceswheretheycanviolatethesonor-
ityprinciple(e.g.,inthesequence strinwordslike
string theconsonant sistotheleftoftheconsonant
t althoughhigherinsonority).
4 Unsupervised
syllabification
Basedtheclassificationofinputsymbolsintovow-
els and consonants, the syllabification procedure
canthenbeapplied. Knowledgeofsyllablestruc-
ture is not only relevant for a better understand-
ing of the procedures and representations that are
involved in both computer and human language
learning but also interesting from an engineering
standpoint, e.g., for the correct pronunciation of
unknownwordsintext-to-speechsystemsorasan
intermediatestepformorphologyinduction.
Several methods have been proposed in the lit-
eratureforanunsupervisedlanguage-independent
syllabification (see Vogel, 1977 for an overview
and Goldsmith and Larson, 1990 for an imple-
mentation of a more recent approach based on
the sonority hierarchy). Some methods that have
been suggested in the literature (going back to
Herodotus, who observed this for Ancient Greek;
cf. Kuryłowicz, 1948) rely on the observation
that word-medial tautosyllabic consonant clusters
mostlyconstituteasubsetofword-peripheralclus-
ters. Intervocalicconsonantclusterscantherefore
be divided up into a word-final and word-initial
cluster. Theoretically, two types of problems can
beencountered. First,thosewheremorethanone
divisionispossibleandsecond,thoseinwhichno
divisionispossible.
Several approaches have been suggested to re-
solve the first problem, i.e., word-medial conso-
nantsequenceswherethereareseveralpossibledi-
visionsbasedontheoccurrenceofword-initialand
word-final clusters. O’Connor and Trim (1953)
andArnold(1956)suggestthatincasesofambigu-
ous word-medial clusters the preference for one
syllable division over another can be determined
bythefrequencyofoccurrenceofdifferenttypesof
word-initialandword-finalclusters. Forthispur-
pose, they determine the frequency of occurrence
ofword-initialandword-finalCV,VC,etc. sylla-
blepatterns. Basedonthesefrequenciestheycal-
culatetheprobabilitiesofdividingaword-medial
sequencebysummingupthevaluesestablishedfor
the different word-peripheral syllable types. The
candidate syllabification with the highest sum is
thenchosenastheoptimaldivision.
Theapproachtakenhereisaslightmodification
oftheproposalinO’ConnorandTrim(1953)and
66
Language Vowels Consonants
Afrikaans ac*eiouyáéêíòóôú bdfghjklmnpqrstvwxä*ë*ï*ü*
Albanian aeg*h*iouyç*éë bcdfjklmnpqrstvxz
Armenian(transl.) aee’y’ioch*o’ bgdzt’jhlxc’khd’ghtwmynshpjr’
svtrcwp’qf
Basque aeiouv*áæéíóö bcdfghklmnpqrstxyzà*ä*çè*ü*
Breton ac*eiouê bdfghjklmnprstvwyzñù*ü*
Chamorro aeiouáâéíóú bcdfghjlmnpqrstvxyã*ñü*
Croatian aeiou bcdfghjklmnprstvzä*ðó*ćčđšž
Czech aeiouyáéíóúýěů bcdfghjklmnpqrstvxzčďňřšťž
Danish aeiouyåæø bcdfghjklmnprstvxz
Dutch ac*eiouy bdfghjklmnpqrstvwxz
English aeg*iot*u bcdfhjklmnpqrsvwxyz
Finnish aeiouyäö bcdfghjklmnpqrstvxz
French aeiouàâèéêîôû bcdfghjklmnpqrstvxyzçë*ï*ù*
ü*œ*
Georgian(transl.) aeiouh* bgdvztk’lmnp’zhrst’pkghqshchts
dzts’ch’khj
German aeh*iop*uyäöü bcdfgjklmnqrstvwxzß
Gothic aeiouv*x*û bdfghjklmnpqrstwzï*þ
Greek αεηιουω βγδζθκλμνξπρςστφχψ
Hungarian ac*eiouyáéíóõöúûü bdfghjklmnprstvxz
Icelandic aeiouyáæéíóöúý bdfghjklmnprstvxðþ
Italian aeh*iouàèìòù bcdfgjklmnpqrstvzé*
Latin aeiouy bcdfghlmnpqrstvxz
Maltese(rev.) aeg*iouàâèìíòù bdfhjklmnpqrstvwxzî*ċġħż
Mandarin(toneless) aeiou ngzhchbcdfghjklmnpqrstwxyzsh
Maori(rev.) aeiou ghkmnprtngwwh
Norwegian(Bokmål) aeiouyåæéóø bcdfghjklmnprstvzë*
Potawatomi(rev.) aeiou cdgklmnpstwshy
Romanian aeiouîă bcdfghjlmnprstvxzşţ
Russian аеиоуы(ь*)эя бвгджзйклмнпрстфхцчшщ(ъ*)
(ю*)
ScotsGaelic ah*iou bcde*fglmnprst
Spanish aeiouáâéêíîóôùú bcdfghjlmnpqrstvxyzñü*
Swahili(rev.) aeiou bdfghjklmnprstvwxyz
Swedish aeiouyäåéö bcdfghjklmnprstvx
Tagalog(rev.) aeiou ngbcdfghjklmnpqrstvwxyz
Turkish aeiouâåîöûüı bcdfghjklmnprstvyzçğş
Ukrainian iаеиоуьюяєії cyбвгджзйклмнпрстфхцчшщґ
Uma aeg*iou bcdfhjklmnprstwyzï*
Warlpiri(rev.) aeh*iou cfjklmnpqrstvwxyz
Wolof aeiouàéëó bcdfgjklmnpqrstwxyñŋ
Xhosa aeg*iot*uâ bcdfhjklmnpqrsvwxyz
Table 1: Results for Sukhotin’s algorithm on Bible texts in 39 languages. All symbols of the input
Bibletextsfortherespectivelanguagesarelistedeveniftheyareveryinfrequent. Forthoselanguages
markedasrevisedthemostfrequentdigraphshavebeenreplacedbyasinglesymbol. Wronglyclassified
symbolsaremarkedwithanasterisk. Languageswithspellingsystemswhichnotoriouslycontainmany
idiosyncraticrulesareshaded. Wedecidedtoincludethemasareferencewheretheproblemsoccurwith
thesesystems.
67
Arnold(1956). Insteadofcountingthefrequency
of occurrence of syllable types, the actual sylla-
blesarecountedinordertodeterminethebestsplit
ofword-medialconsonantsequences. Anexample
calculationfortheGermanword fasten ’toabstain
fromfood’isgiveninTable2.
a) fast142] en [fast.en] sum: 142
b) fas 528] [216ten [fas.ten] sum: 744
c) fa [176sten [fa.sten] sum: 176
Table2: Examplecalculationsfortheword-medial
clusterintheGermanword fasten .
The example calculations in Table 2 show that
thecandidatesyllabificationinb)yieldsthehigh-
estsumandisthereforechosenasthecorrectsyl-
labification of the word. One of the advantages
of this approach (as well as the one proposed by
O’ConnorandTrimandArnold)isthatOMPfol-
lowsfromthefactthatword-initialCVsequences
are more frequent than word-final VC sequences
anddoesnothavetobestipulatedindependently.
The claim that CV is the unmarked syllable
structureforalllanguagesoftheworld(andOMPa
universal principle) has been challenged by some
Australian languages that seem to behave differ-
ently with respect to syllabification of VCV se-
quences (Breen and Pensalfini, 1999). In those
languagesVCVsequencesaresyllabifiedasVC.V
instead of V.CV, as OMP would predict. The
authors provide evidence from a number of pro-
cessesintheselanguages(reduplication,language
games) as well as historical and comparative evi-
dencethatsupporttheanalysisthatVCseemstobe
more accurate as the basic syllable type for those
languages. 4
Forcaseswhereword-medialclusterscannotbe
broken up by sequences that are found at word
edges(badclusters),wedecidedtogobacktothe
original method used by O’Connor and Trim and
Arnold and calculate the frequency of occurrence
of syllable types. However, bad clusters are not
very frequent compared to the overall data in our
experiments.
One additional problem when working with
writtentexts 5 ratherthantranscribedcorporaisthe
4 Notethatthisdoesnotinvalidateoneofthebasicassump-
tions of Sukhotin’s algorithm, since C and V still alternate
eventhoughinthereverseorder.
5 Somelinguistsalsobelievethatstresscanleadtoavio-
lation of OMP by attracting an intervocalic consonant to the
codaofthepreviousstressedsyllable. Sincestressisusually
Dutch aa(772),oo(510),ie(440),ui(301),
ou(155),eu(110),uu(27)
German ei(1373),au(641),eu(216)
English ea(336),ou(280),io(231),oo(79)
French ai (863), ou (686), eu (397), io
(339),ui(272),au(232),oi(232)
Greek ου (1687), ει (1684), ευ (650), οι
(616),αυ(287)
Wolof aa (1027), ee (821), oo (656), ée
(181),ii(158),óo(118)
Table 3: ”Diphthongs” for a subset of the lan-
guagesinthesample(inbracketsthefrequencyof
adjacentoccurrence).
fact that diphthongs are not clearly distinguished
from sequences of monophthongs. Yet this is vi-
talforacorrectsyllabificationproceduresincethe
number of syllables of the word is different de-
pending on this choice. In order to retrieve the
diphthongs of the language from the distribution
ofvowelsequencesinthecorpusthefollowingap-
proachhasbeenused. 6 Foreachbigramvowelse-
quence the number of times the first vowel v1 is
directlyfollowedbythesecondvowel v2 iscom-
pared with the number of times both vowels are
separated by one consonant. If the frequency of
direct adjacency is higher than the frequency of
v1cv2 the sequence is considered to be a ”diph-
thong”; if not, the sequence is considered to be a
caseofhiatusandbothvowelsareattributedtodif-
ferent syllables. Similar to Sukhotin’s algorithm
thepresentsyllabificationalgorithmisalsoglobal
in the sense that the diphthong/monophthong dis-
tinctionisalwaysusedinthesamewaynomatter
in which environment the sequence occurs. 7 Ta-
ble3givesalistofthediphthongsextractedfrom
thecorpusforanumberoflanguagesinoursample
basedonthismethod.
4.1 The
problem of evaluating syllabification
methods
There are several reasons why a gold standard
for syllabification, with which the syllabification
methods are compared, is difficult to establish.
not reflected in most orthographies, we do not consider this
optionhere.
6 WethankBernhardWälchli(p.c.) fordrawingouratten-
tiontothisidea.
7 InGerman,forinstance,thevowelsequence eu caneither
be tautosyllabic and in that case constitute a diphthong as in
heute ’today’; or it can be a case of hiatus and therefore be
brokenupbyasyllableboundaryasin Museum ’museum’.
68
Duanmu(2009)statesthatevenforwell-described
languageslikeEnglishlinguistsdonotagreeonthe
correct syllabification of comparatively straight-
forwardcases. FortheEnglishword happy ,forin-
stance,fourdifferentanalyseshavebeenproposed:
[hæ.pi] Hayes (1995), Halle (1998), Guss-
mann(2002)
[hæp.i ] Selkirk(1982),Hammond(1999)
[hæp i] Kahn (1976), Giegerich (1992),
Kreidler(2004)
[hæp.pi ] Burzio(1994)
Table 4: Analyses of happy (cited from Duanmu,
2009). Underlinedconsonantsareambisyllabic.
The correct syllabification of a word can best
beestablishedwhenthereissomeoperationinthe
languagethattakesrecourseonthesyllablestruc-
ture of the word. In the case of the Australian
languageswithnosyllableonsets,BreenandPen-
salfini(1999:6f)provideevidencefromreduplica-
tionprocessesinArrerntetosupporttheiranalysis.
IftheArrerntesyllableshapeisVC(C),ratherthan
(C)CV,reduplicationismoststraightforwardlyde-
scribedintermsofsyllables. Theattenuativepre-
fix is formed by /-elp/ preceded by the first syl-
lable of the base if VC(C) syllabification is as-
sumed. The attenuative form of the base emp waṛ
’to make’ is therefore emp welpemp waṛ .8 A simi-
larargumentationcanbeputforwardforlanguages
that show phonological operations that are based
onthestructureofsyllables,e.g.,syllable-finalde-
voicing. Ifavoicedobstruentisrealizedunvoiced,
thesyllabificationmightsuggestitspositiontobe
inthecoda.
Besides disagreement on the correct syllabifi-
cation of words, another crucial aspect of eval-
uating syllabification methods is the question of
whether the test set should consist of a random
sampleofwordsofthelanguageorwhetherthere
should be any constraints on the composition of
the evaluation data. If the evaluation consists of
ahugenumberofmonosyllabicwords,theresults
are much better than with polysyllabic words be-
causenoconsonantclustershavetobebrokenup.
8 As
one reviewer remarked, reduplication patterns are
usuallydescribedintermsofaCV-templateratherthansylla-
blestructures. However,inthecaseofArrernte,adescription
intermsofsyllablesratherthanVC(C)shapeswouldbemore
elegant and at the same time account for other operations as
well.
Fortheevaluationoftheirsyllabificationmethods,
Goldwater and Johnson (2005) distinguish words
with any number of syllables from words with at
leasttwosyllables. Dependingonthemethodthat
they test the differences in the percentage of cor-
rectlysyllabifiedwordsrangefromafewtoalmost
30%. Itisthereforeeasiertogetbetterresultswhen
applyingthesyllabificationmethodstolanguages
with a large number of monosyllabic words and
fewer consonant clusters, like Mandarin Chinese,
forinstance.
4.2 Discussion
and evaluation
One of the problems of a cross-linguistic inves-
tigation is the availability of gold standards for
evaluation. Thus,insteadofprovidingacompara-
tiveevaluation,wewanttodiscusstheadvantages
and disadvantages of the procedure with respect
to the more common sonority-based syllabifica-
tionmethod. Wetestedourmethodonamanually
created gold standard of 1,000 randomly selected
wordsinLatin. Theprecisionis92.50%andthere-
call94.96%(F-Score0.94)foreachtransitionfrom
one symbol to another. Most misplaced syllable
boundaries are due to the vowel cluster io , which
hasbeentreatedasadiphthongbyourmethod.
The most interesting aspect of our approach is
thatitisabletoaccountforthoselanguageswhere
intervocalic consonants are better be analyzed as
belongingtotheprevioussyllable,therebyviolat-
ing OMP. Approaches relying on the Onset Max-
imizationPrinciplewouldgetallofthesesyllable
boundaries wrong. Breen and Pensalfini (1999)
notethatArrerntealsohasonlyVCinword-initial
position. Consequently,anapproachthatisbased
onword-peripheralclusterscanpredictthelackof
word-medial onsets correctly. The importance of
word-peripheralclustersisalsosupportedbyfind-
ingsinGoldwaterandJohnson(2005)whereabi-
gram model improves after training with Expec-
tation Maximization whereas a positional model
doesnot,whichmightbeduetothefactthatabi-
grammodel(unlikethepositionalmodel)cangen-
eralizewhateveritlearnsaboutclustersnomatter
iftheyoccuratwordedgesorword-medially.
Moreover, the influence of word-peripheral
clustersonthesyllabificationofword-medialcon-
sonantsequencesisnotrestrictedtosyllabletypes
only, but sometimes also holds solely for individ-
ual consonants. In Chamorro, for instance, Top-
ping (1973) describes the syllabification of inter-
vocalic consonants as observing OMP. However,
69
this does not apply if the consonant is the glottal
stop/’/,inwhichcasethesyllabledivisionoccurs
after the consonant, leading to the syllabification
/na’.i/’togive’. Theinterestingobservationinthis
respectisthattheglottalstopphonologicallynever
occurs at the beginning of a word in Chamorro
whereas all other consonants (with the exception
of/w/)dooccurword-initially, 9 whichleadstothe
correctsyllabificationresultswithourapproach.
Anotheradvantageofthepresentmethodisthat
clusters with sibilant consonants that do not con-
formtothesonorityprinciple(seetheexampleof
str in Section 3.3) do not have to be treated dif-
ferently. They merely follow from the fact that
these clusters are particularly frequent in word-
peripheral position. The biggest disadvantage is
the fact that the method is sensitive to frequen-
cies of individual clusters and thereby sometimes
breaks up clusters that should be tautosyllabic
(oneofthefewexamplesinourLatincorpuswas
teneb.rae ).
5 Conclusions
and future work
Acompletemodelofsyllabificationinvolvesmore
than what has been presented in this paper. The
methodproposedhereisrestrictedtosinglewords
and does not take into account resyllabification
acrosswordboundariesaswellassomeothercrite-
riathatmightinfluencetheactualsyllablestructure
ofwordssuchasstressandmorphologicalbound-
aries. Nevertheless,thediscussionofourapproach
shows that expanding the range of languages to
otherfamiliesandareasoftheworldcanchallenge
someofthewell-establishedfindingsthatareused
forinferringlinguisticknowledge.
The results of Sukhotin’s algorithm show that
the distinction between vowels and consonants,
which is vital for any syllabification method, can
beinducedfromrawtextsonthebasisofthesim-
ple assumptions that vowels and consonants tend
to alternate and that a vowel is the most frequent
symbol in a corpus. In contrast to previous stud-
ies of the algorithm (Sassoon, 1992), our results
donotsufferfromthefactthattheinputtextistoo
shortandthereforeyieldbetterresults.
Based on the classifications of symbols into
vowelsandconsonantswithSukhotin’salgorithm
our unsupervised syllabification method deter-
9 Toppingnotesthatphoneticallythereisaglottalstoppre-
cedingeveryword-initialvowel,yetthisistotallypredictable
inthispositionandthereforenotphonemic.
mines syllable boundaries on distributional infor-
mation. In contrast to other unsupervised ap-
proachestosyllabificationthataregroundedonat-
tributing a sonority value to each consonant and
OMP, our procedure breaks up word-medial con-
sonant sequences by considering the frequencies
ofallpossibleword-peripheralclustersinorderto
get the most probable division. We did not pro-
videacomparativeevaluationofourprocedurebut
only discussed the problems that can be encoun-
teredwhenlookingatawidervarietyoflanguages
andhowtheycanbesolvedbyourapproach. The
questionthatthispaperwantstoraiseistherefore
ifitismoreimportanttooptimizeaprocedureon
asinglelanguage(mostlyEnglishorrelatedEuro-
peanlanguages)orwhetheritshouldbecapableof
dealing with the variety of structures that can be
foundinthelanguagesoftheworld.
For future work we want to apply the present
methods on phonetically transcribed corpora in
order to be able to compare the results for the
well-studied European languages to other meth-
ods. Therearestillsomechallengesremainingfor
auniversalsyllabificationprocedure,oneofthem
being the detection of syllabic consonants. Ulti-
mately, we also want to integrate a sonority hier-
archyoftheinputsymbolstocombinetheadvan-
tages of both approaches and to create a gradual
valueforsyllabificationthatisabletoaccountfor
the difference between clear-cut syllable bound-
aries and ambisyllabic consonants or other cases
whereasyllableboundaryishardertoestablish.
Acknowledgments
This work has been funded by the research ini-
tiative”ComputationalAnalysisofLinguisticDe-
velopment” and the DFG Sonderforschungsbere-
ich 471 ”Variation und Entwicklung im Lexikon”
at the University of Konstanz. The author would
liketothanktheAustralianInstituteofAboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) for
theWarlpiriBiblesectionsaswellasMiriamButt,
Frans Plank, Bernhard Wälchli and three anony-
mous reviewers for valuable comments and sug-
gestions.
References
Gordon F. Arnold. 1955-1956. A phonological ap-
proach to vowel, consonant and syllable in modern
french. Lingua ,V:251–287.
70
EmilyBender. 2009. Linguisticallynaive!=language
independent: Why NLP needs linguistic typology.
In Proceedings of the EACL 2009 Workshop on the
Interaction between Linguistics and Computational
Linguistics ,pages26–32.
Gavan Breen and Rob Pensalfini. 1999. Arrernte: A
languagewithnosyllableonsets. Linguistic Inquiry ,
30(1):1–25.
LuigiBurzio. 1994. PrinciplesofEnglishStress . Cam-
bridge: CambridgeUniversityPress.
San Duanmu. 2009. Syllable Structure . Oxford: Ox-
fordUniversityPress.
Heinz Giegerich. 1992. English Phonology . Cam-
bridge: CambridgeUniversityPress.
John Goldsmith and Gary Larson. 1990. Local mod-
elling and syllabification. In Michael Ziolkowski,
Manuela Noske, and Karen Deaton, editors, The
Parasession on the Syllable in Phonetics & Phonol-
ogy , volume 2 of Papers from the 26th Regional
Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic , pages 130–141.
ChicagoLinguisticSociety.
John Goldsmith and Aris Xanthos. 2009. Learning
phonologicalcategories. Language ,85(1):4–38.
Sharon Goldwater and Mark Johnson. 2005. Rep-
resentational bias in unsupervised learning of syl-
lable structure. In Proceedings of the 9th Confer-
ence on Computational Natural Language Learning
(CONLL), Ann Arbor .
Edmund Gussmann. 2002. Phonoloy: Analysis and
Theory . Cambridge: CambridgeUniversityPress.
JacquesB.M.Guy. 1991. Vowelidentification: anold
(butgood)algorithm. Cryptologia ,XV(3):258–262,
July.
MorrisHalle. 1998. Thestressofenglishwords. Lin-
guistic Inquiry ,29(4):539–568.
MichaelHammond. 1999. The Phonology of English:
A Prosodic Optimality Theoretic Approach . Oxford:
OxfordUniversityPress.
Bruce Hayes. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory: Prin-
ciples and Case Studies . Chicage: University of
ChicagePress.
RomanJakobsonandMorrisHalle. 1956. Fundamen-
tals of Language I. Phonology and Phonetics . ’s-
Gravenhage: Mouton.
DanielKahn. 1976. Syllable-based generalizations in
English phonology . Ph.D.thesis,MassachusettsIn-
stituteofTechnology.
Charles W. Kreidler. 2004. The Pronunciation of En-
glish: A Course Book . Malden,MA:Blackwell.
Jerzy Kuryłowicz. 1948. Contribution à la théorie de
la syllabe. Bulletin de la Societe Polonaise de Lin-
guistique ,8:5–114.
Ian Maddieson. 2008. Consonant-vowel ratio. In
Martin Haspelmath, Matthew S. Dryer, David Gil,
and Bernard Comrie, editors, The World Atlas of
Language Structures Online , chapter 3. Munich:
Max Planck Digital Library. Available online at
http://wals.info/feature/3.Accessedon2010-04-23.
J.D.O’ConnorandJ.L.M.Trim. 1953. Vowel,conso-
nant,andsyllable-aphonologicaldefinition. Word ,
9(2):103–122.
George T. Sassoon. 1992. The application of
Sukhotin’s algorithm to certain Non-English lan-
guages. Cryptologia ,16(2):165–173.
Elisabeth O. Selkirk. 1982. The syllable. In Harry
vanderHulstandNorvalSmith,editors, The Struc-
ture of Phonological Representations, part II ,pages
337–383.Dordrecht: Foris.
BorisV.Sukhotin. 1962. Eksperimental’noevydelenie
klassovbukvspomoşçjuevm. Problemystrukturnoj
lingvistiki ,234:189–206.
Boris V. Sukhotin. 1973. Méthode de déchiffrage,
outil de recherche en linguistique. T.A. Informa-
tions ,2:1–43.
Donald M. Topping. 1980. Chamorro Reference
Grammar . The University Press of Hawaii, Hon-
olulu.
IreneVogel. 1977. The Syllable in Phonological The-
ory with Special Reference to Italian . Ph.D. thesis,
StanfordUniversity.
71

