Proceedings of the 8th Workshop on Asian Language Resources, pages 111–119,
Beijing, China, 21-22 August 2010. c 2010 Asian Federation for Natural Language Processing
 
Unaccusative/Unergative Distinction in Turkish:  
A Connectionist Approach 
Cengiz Acartürk 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
acarturk@acm.org 
Deniz Zeyrek 
Middle East Technical University 
Ankara, Turkey 
dezeyrek@metu.edu.tr 
 
Abstract 
This study presents a novel computational 
approach to the analysis of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Turkish by 
employing feed-forward artificial neural 
networks with a backpropagation algo-
rithm. The findings of the study reveal cor-
respondences between semantic notions 
and syntactic manifestations of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in this language, 
thus presenting a computational analysis of 
the distinction at the syntax/semantics in-
terface. The approach is applicable to other 
languages, particularly the ones which lack 
an explicit diagnostic such as auxiliary se-
lection but has a number of diagnostics in-
stead. 
1 Introduction

Ever since Unaccusativity Hypothesis (UH, 
Perlmutter, 1978), it is widely recognized that 
there are two heterogeneous subclasses of in-
transitive verbs, namely unaccusatives and un-
ergatives. The phenomenon of unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction is wide-ranging and 
labeled in a variety of ways, including active, 
split S, and split intransitivity (SI). (cf. Mithun, 
1991).
1
 
  Studies dealing with SI are numerous and re-
cently, works taking auxiliary selection as the 
basis of this syntactic phenomenon have in-
creased (cf. McFadden, 2007 and the references 
therein). However, SI in languages that lack 
                                                 
1
 In this paper, the terms unaccusative/unergative 
distinction and split intransitivity (SI) are used 
interchangeably. 
explicit syntactic manifestations such as auxil-
iary selection has been less studied.
2
 Computa-
tional approaches are even scarcer.
 
The major 
goal of this study is to discuss the linguistic is-
sues surrounding SI in Turkish and present a 
novel computational approach that decides 
which verbs are unaccusative and which verbs 
are unergative in this language. The computa-
tional approach may in turn be used to study the 
split in lesser-known languages, especially the 
ones lacking a clear diagnostic. It may also be 
used with well-known languages where the split 
is observed as a means to confirm earlier predic-
tions made about SI.  
2 Approaches
to Split Intransitivity (SI) 
Broadly speaking, approaches to the SI may be 
syntactic or semantic. Syntactic approaches di-
vide intransitive verbs into two syntactically 
distinct classes. According to the seminal work 
of Perlmutter (1978), unaccusative and unerga-
tive verbs form two syntactically distinct classes 
of intransitive verbs. Within the context of Rela-
tional Grammar, Perlmutter (1978) proposed 
that unaccusative verbs have an underlying ob-
ject promoted to the subject position, while un-
ergative verbs have a base-generated subject. 
This hypothesis, known as the Unaccusativity 
Hypothesis (UH) maintains that the mapping of 
the sole argument of an intransitive verb onto 
syntax as subject or direct object is semantically 
predictable. The UH distinguishes active or ac-
tivity clauses (i.e., unergative clauses) from un-
accusative ones. Unergative clauses include 
                                                 
2
 An exception is Japanese. For example see Kishimoto 
(1996), Hirakawa (1999), Oshita (1997), Sorace and Sho-
mura (2001), and the references therein. Also see Richa 
(2008) for Hindi. 
111
willed or volitional acts (work, speak) and cer-
tain involuntary bodily process predicates 
(cough, sleep); unaccusative clauses include 
predicates whose initial term is semantically 
patient (fall, die), predicates of existing and 
happening (happen, vanish), nonvoluntary 
emission predicates (smell, shine), aspectual 
predicates (begin, cease), and duratives (remain, 
survive). 
   From a Government and Binding perspective, 
Burzio (1986) differentiates between two in-
transitive classes by the verbs’ theta-marking 
properties. In unaccusative verbs (labeled ‘erga-
tives’), the sole argument is the same as the 
deep structure object; in unergative verbs, the 
sole argument is the same as the agent at the 
surface. The configuration of the two intransi-
tive verb types may be represented simply as 
follows: 
 
 Unergatives: NP [
VP
  V]  John ran. 
 Unaccusatives: [
VP
  V NP]   John fell. 
 
In its original formulation, the UH claimed that 
the determination of verbs as unaccusative or 
unergative somehow correlated with their se-
mantics and since then, there has been so much 
theoretical discussion about how strong this 
connection is. It has also been noted that a strict 
binary division is actually not tenable because 
across languages, some verbs fail to behave 
consistently with respect to certain diagnostics. 
For example, it has been shown that, with stan-
dard diagnostics, certain verbs such as last, stink, 
bleed, die, etc can be classified as unaccusative 
in one language, unergative in a different lan-
guage (Rosen, 1984; Zaenen, 1988, among 
many others). This situation is referred to as 
unaccusativity mismatches. New proposals that 
specifically focus on these problems have also 
been made (e.g., Sorace, 2000, below).  
2.1 The
Connection of Syntax and Seman-
tics in SI  
Following the initial theoretical discussions 
about the connection between syntactic diagnos-
tics and their semantic underpinnings, various 
semantic factors were suggested. These involve 
directed change and internal/external causation 
(Levin & Rappaport-Hovav, 1995), inferable 
eventual position or state (Lieber & Baayen, 
1997), telicity and controllability (Zaenen, 
1993), and locomotion (see Randall, 2007; 
Alexiadou et al., 2004, and, Aranovich, 2007, 
and McFadden, 2007 for reviews). Some re-
searchers have suggested that syntax has no role 
in SI. For example, van Valin (1990), focusing 
on Italian, Georgian, and Achenese, proposed 
that SI is best characterized in terms of Aksion-
sart and volitionality. Kishimoto (1996) sug-
gested that volitionality is the semantic parame-
ter that largely determines unaccusa-
tive/unergative distinction in Japanese.  
   Auxiliary selection is among the most reliable 
syntactic diagnostics proposed for SI. This re-
fers to the auxiliary selection properties of lan-
guages that have two perfect auxiliaries corre-
sponding to be and have in English. In Romance 
and Germanic languages such as Italian, Dutch, 
German, and to a lesser extent French, the equi-
valents of be (essere, zijn, sein, etre) tend to be 
selected by unaccusative predicates while the 
equivalents of have (avere, haben, hebben, 
avoir) tend to be selected by unergative predi-
cates (Burzio, 1986; Zaenen, 1993; Keller, 
2000; Legendre, 2007, among others). In (1a–b) 
the situation is illustrated in French (F), German 
(G) and Italian (I). (Examples are from Legen-
dre, 2007). 
 
(1) a. Maria a travaillé (F)/hat gearbeitet 
(G)/ha lavorato (I).  
  ‘Maria worked.’ 
 b. Maria est venue (F)/ist gekommen 
(G)/é venuta (I).  
  ‘Maria came.’ 
 
Van Valin (1990) and Zaenen (1993) discuss 
auxiliary selection as a manifestation of the se-
mantic property of telicity. Hence in Dutch, 
zijn-taking verbs are by and large telic, hebben-
taking verbs are atelic.  
   Impersonal passivization is another diagnostic 
that seems applicable to a wide range of lan-
guages and used by a number of authors, e.g. 
Perlmutter (1978), Hoekstra and Mulder (1990), 
Keller (2000). This construction is predicted to 
be grammatical with unergative clauses but not 
with unaccusative clauses. Zaenen (1993) notes 
that impersonal passivization is controlled by 
the semantic notion of protagonist control in 
Dutch; therefore incompatibility of examples 
such as bleed with impersonal passivization is 
112
attributed to the fact that bleed is not a prtago-
nist control verb. Levin and Rap-Hov 
(1995:141) take impersonal passivization as an 
unaccusativity diagnostic but take its sensitiity 
to protagonist control as a necessary but an n-
sufficient condition for unergative verbs to al-
low it. Inother words, nly uergative verbs 
wilbefound ithi ctrctio, thg notl
of them. 
   Refinements of the UH have als be pro-
posed. Most notably, Sorace (20) argued that 
the variationattested acros languages (as well 
as within the dialects of a single language) is 
orderly, and that there are number of cut-off 
points to which verb classes can be sensitive.  
   Sorace’s work on (monadic) itransitive verbs 
is built on variation inthe perfective auxiliary 
selection of verbs in Romance and Germanic 
langages and called Auxiliary Selection Hier-
archy (ASH). he demonstrates that the varia-
tion isbased ona hierarchy ofthematic and as-
pectualspecificatio ofthe verbs (viz., telicity 
and agentivity) and that it is a function of the
position of a verb on the hierarchy. Verbs with a 
high degree aspectual and thematic specifica-
tion occupy the extreme ends; variable verbs 
occupy the middlposition, reflecting the de-
creasing degree of aspectual specificaton. Both 
cross-dialectly and across languages, these 
verbs may be used either with unaccusative or 
unergative syntax.
3
 The ASHtherefore is a de-
scriptstatement considering auxiliary selec-
tion as a property characterized by both syntax 
and semantics, as originally viewed by the UH.  
   We now turn to Turkish, which lacks perfec-
tivauxiliaries. A number ofthr syntaci
diagnostics, reviewed below, have been pro-
posed but unlike auxiliaries in other lguages, 
these are not bligatory constructions inTurk-
ish. In addition, the semantic properties underly-
ing the prosed diagostics have ot been 
studied extenively. Therefore, Turkish presents 
a particular challenge fr any stud abut SI.   
                                                 
3
 The claim tha the wo notions ofASHlie within a single 
diensonalhierarchy has been questoned by Randal
(2007).  ASH s alo critiizinc itdoes not 
xplain thereaon  rtan lnguageshowthe
patern i does (McFdden, 2007). 
3 Diagnostics
for SI in Turkish 
Just as other languages, intransitive verbs in 
Turkish are sensitive to a set of syntactic envi-
ronments, summarized below.
3.1   The –ArAk Construction 
One of the diagnostic sthe –ArAk construc-
tion, wichisan adverbial clause formed wih 
the rot verbplus the morpeme –ArAk 
(Özkaragöz, 1986). In a Turkish clause which 
involves the al sufix –ArAk, both the con-
troller (thcomplement verb) and theargt (he 
matrix verb) have o be ithe unacusaiveor
unergatve. In addition, othe cotrolled and 
the target have to be thfinal (surface) subjects
of the clause. The examples below contain sen-
tences were oth e controller andthe target 
verbs are unaccusative (2) or both are unerga-
tive (3). The examples also contain ungram-
matical sentencs wherethecontrolleverb is 
unergatve whereas the arget verb is unaccusa-
tive (4), and those in whichthe controller verb 
is unaccusativereas target  is
unergative (5). (Examples ar fom Özkargöz,
1986). 
(2) Hasan [kol-u  kana -y arak] acı çek  
-ti. 
            arm-POSS bled-GLArAk suffer 
-PST 
 ‘Hasan, while his arm bled, suffered.’  
(3)Kız [ (top) oyna-y arak]    şarkı söyle-
di.
 girl    ball  play-GLArAk   sing 
-PST 
 ‘The girl, while playing (ball), sang.’  
(4)* Kız [ (top) oyna-y arak]    kay-dı.
    girl    ball  playGLArAk   slip PST 
‘The girl, while playing (ball), slipped.’ 
(5) * Kız [kayak kay-arak]   düş-tü. 
   girl    ski-ArAk              fallPST
 ‘The girl, while skiing, fell.’ 
3.2   Double Causatives 
uble construction ilowed with unacsa-
tive verbt t withuergatives, assow in
(6) and (7) below (Özkaragöz, 1986). 
(6) Sema Turhan-a                çiçeğ-i         
soldur     t      tu. 
                      -DATflower-ACC 
fade-CAUS-PST 
113
 ‘Sema made Turhan cause the flower 
to fade.’ 
(7) * Ben Turhan-a Sema-yı koş-tur       
-t       -t   um 
 I    -DAT -ACC run-CAUS-
CAUS-PST1sg
 ‘I made Turhan make Sema run.’ 
3.3   Gerund Constructions 
The gerund constructions –Irken ‘while’ and 
–IncE ‘when’ ar further diagnostics. The for-
mer denots simulaneous action and the latr 
dees consecutive action. Unrgv vbs
are predicted to be compatible with the –Irken 
construction, whereas unaccusatives are pe-
dicted to be compatible ith he IncE con-
struction, as shon in (8) and (9).
4
 
 
(8) Adam çalış-ırken esne-di. 
man workIrken yawPAST.3per.sg 
 ‘The man yawned while working.’
(9)Atlet takıl-ınca    düş-tü. 
 athlete tripIncE fallPAST.3per.sg 
‘The athlete when tripped fell.’ 
3.4   The Suffix –Ik 
It has also been suggested that the derivational 
suffix –Ik, used for deriving adjectives from 
verbs, is compatible with unaccusatives but not 
with unergatives, ahown in(10) and (1). 
 
(10) bat-ık    gemi 
 sinkIk  ship
the sunk ship 
(11) *çalış-ık adam
  workIk man 
the worked mn 
3.5   The –mIş Participle 
The past participle marker –mIş, which is used 
for deriving adjectives from verbs has been pro-
posed as yet another diagnostic. The suffix –mIş 
forms participles with ransitve and intransitive 
verbs, as well as passivized verbs. basic 
requirement for the acceptability of the –mIş 
participle is the existence of an internal argu-
ment n the clause. In wel-formed –mIş partici-
ples, he modified noun must be the external 
                                                
4
 Examples in ections 3.3 and 3.4 are from Nakipoğlu 
(1998). 
argument of a transitive verb (e.g., anne 
‘mother’ in [12]), or the internal argument of a 
passivized verb (e.g., borç ‘debt’ in [13]). The 
internal argument of a transitive verb isot al-
lowed asthe difiednou asillustrated in
(14). 
 
(12) Çocuğ-n      bırak-mış ane 
 ChildPOSSACC  leavmI  mother
‘a/the mother who left her children’ 
(13) Öde-nmiş borç 
 payPASS-mI  debt
‘the paid debt’
(14) *Öde-miş borç 
 paymI    debt
*‘the pay debt’ 
 
Asexpcted, th adjectivs formed byintrasi-
tive verbsanthe –mIş paiple is moe ac-
ceptable with unaccusatives comared tour-
gatives, as shown in (15) and (16). 
 
(15) sol-muş/ kar-mış çiek 
 wilt/ blcen mIflower
‘The td/blcknd flower’ 
(16) *sıçra-mış yüz-müş/bağı-mışçocuk 
 jump/ swim/ shout mI child 
‘The jumpedm/ shouted child’ 
3.6   Impersonal Passivization 
Impersonal passivization, used as a diagnostic 
to single out nergatives by some researchers, 
appears usable for Turkish as well. In Turkish, 
impersnal passiv carry the phnologically 
conditioned passive suffix marke, -Il, accom-
panied by an indefinite human interpretation 
and a resistance to agentive by-phrases. It has 
been suggested that the tense in which the verb 
appears affects the acceptability of impersonal 
passives: when the verb is n the aorist, the im-
plicit subject has an arbitrary interpretation, .e. 
either a generic or existential interptaon. On 
the oer hand, in those cases when the verb is
in past tense, e implicit ubject asa referen-
tial meaning, namely a first person plural read-
ing. It was therfosuggested thatimpersonal 
passivization s a proper diagnostic environment
only in the past tense, which as also adopted 
in the present study (Nakipoğlu-Demiralp, 
2001, cf. Sezer, 1991). (17) and (18) exemplify 
114
impersonal passivization with the verb inthe 
past tense. 
 
(17) Burada koşuldu. 
 Here     run-PASS-PST 
‘There was running here.’ (existential 
interpretation)  
(18) ??Bu yetimhanede     büyündü. 
 This orphanage-LOC grow-PASS-PST 
‘It was grown in this orphanage.’ 
 
The diagnostics summarized above do not al-
ways pck out the same verbs in Turkish. For 
example, ost diagnostics will fare well ith 
the verbs düş‘fal’, gel‘come’, gir‘entr’ 
(with a human subject) just as ell as imper-
sonal passivization. In other ords, these vbs 
are unaccusative according to most diagnostics 
and unergative impersonal 
passiviztio. The opposite of this situation also 
holds. The stative verb devamet‘contiue’ is 
bad or marginally acceptable wh m
diagnostics as wel as impersonal passivization. 
   The conclusion is that in Turkish, acceptabil-
ity judgments with the propsed diagnostic en-
vironmentsdo notyield a clear distncton be-
tween naccuative and unergative verbs. In 
addition, it is not clear hich semantic proper-
ties these diagostics are correlated with. The 
modeldescribed low is expected to prvide 
some answers to hese ssues. It is based on na-
tive speaker judgments but itgoebeyond them 
by computationally showng hat there are cor-
respondences between semantic notions and 
syntactic manifestations ofSI in Turkish. The 
model s presentd below.
4 Th
Modl 
This study employs feed-forward artificial neu-
ral networks with a backpropagation algorithm 
as computational models for the analysis of un-
accusative/unergative distinction in Turkish. 
4.1 Artifcal
Neural Networks and Learn-
ing Pradigs
An artifical neural network (ANN) isa compu-
tational model that can be used asa n-linear 
statical data modeling tool. ANs are gener-
ally used for deriving a function from observa-
tions, in applications where the data are com-
plex and its difficulto devise a relationship 
between observations and outputs by hand. 
ANNs are charterizd by interconetd 
group of artificial neurons, namely nodes. An 
ANN gnrlystr major lars f s: 
a single input layer, a single or multiple hidden 
layers, and a single outpt layer. In a feedor-
war ANN,the tps frm al thenods gt 
succeeding but not preceding layers. 
   There are three major learning paradigms that 
are used for training ANs: supervised learning, 
unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learn-
ing. A backproagation algorithm isa super-
vised learning method which is used for teach-
in a neural network h toperfrm a secific 
task. ccordingly, a feed-forward ANN with a 
bacpropagation algorithm is a computational 
tool that models the relationship between obser-
vations and output by employing supervised 
learning eth (see Hertz et al., 19; Andr-
son & Rosenfeld, 1988, among many others for 
ANNs). The folowing section prest how 
such an ANis used fr aalyzg uacusa-
tive/unergative distinctio in Turkish.  
4.2 The
Analysis  
Two feed-forward ANNs with a backpropaga-
tion algorithm were developed for the analysis. 
Both models had a single inputlayer, single 
hidden layer, and a e output ayer of nodes. 
h ls d  si node, which 
represents the binary status of a given verb as 
unaccusative (0) or unergative (1). The number 
of nodes n the hidden layer was variable (see 
below for a discussion of netork parameters).  
   The difference between the two models was 
the design othe input layer. The first odel 
(henceforth, the diagnostics odel DIAG) took 
diagnostics as input nodes, whereas the second 
model (henceforth,the semantic parameters 
SEMANP) ook 
input nodes, as presented in detail below. 
   The Diagnostics Model (DIAG): Binary ac-
ceptability values of the phrases or sentences 
formed by the syntactic diagnostics constituted 
the input nodes fr the network (see above fr 
SI iagstics). Each sytactic diagnostic 
provided a binary value (either 0 or 1) to one of 
the input nodes. For example, consider the –mIş 
participle as one of the syntactic diagnostics for 
SI n Turkish. As discussed above, the ş par-
ticiple formsacceptable adjectival phrases with 
115
unaccusative verbs (e.g., sol‘wilt’) bu not 
with e unrgative rbs (e.g, sıçra‘jump, 
leap’), as shown in (19) and (20) below.
 
   (19) sol-muş çiek-ler 
           wiltmI flowerPLU 
           ‘wilted fers’ 
   (20) *sıçra-mış sporcu-lar 
             jumpmI   sportsman
            ‘jumped sportsmen’ 
 
Accordingly, for the vrb sol‘wilt’, the –mIş 
partciple diagnostic provides the value 1 wit
one of the input nodes, hereas for the verb 
sıçra‘jump, lea’ it provides th value 0ith 
the corresonding put ne. In thisway, the 
syntactic diagnostics constituted an input pat-
tern with eight embers for each verb.
5
 The 
construction of an input pattern is exemplified 
in (21) for the unergative verb konuş‘talk’. 
 
(21) A sample input pattern for DIAG. 
a. *Adam konuşarak kızardı. :0 
The man talk-ArAk blush-PST 
 ‘The man blushed by talking.’ 
b.Adam konuşarak yürüdü. :1
 The man talk-Arak walk-PST  
‘The man walked by talking.’
c. *Adam kadına çocuğu konuşturtu. :0 
‘The man ade the woman have 
the boy talked.’ 
d. Adam konuşurken yürüdü. :1 
The man talk-Irken walk-PST  
 ‘The man walked while talking.’ 
e.Adam konuşunca yürüdü. :1
 The man speak-IncE walk-PST  
‘The man walked when he talked.’
f. *Konuş-uk adam :0 
TalkIk man 
 ‘The talked man’  
g.*Konuş-mu adm:0
 TalkmI man 
‘The talked man’ 
h. Törende onuşuldu. :1 
Ceremony-LOC talk-PASS 
 ‘It was spoken in the ceremony.’  
                                                 
5
 One of the syntacti diagnostics(thegerund suffix   
–ArAk ) involvetwo verbs(i.e.,  arget nd the matrx 
verb). Trefore, sentnces/phrasewreformed–one 
with unacusati and the otr ith unergativeswhich 
provided to binary values with the input parn. 
Accordingly, the input atern for the vrb 
konuş‘talk’ is schematically shown below.
0 1 0 1  0  1 
   The Semantic Parameters Model (SE-
MANP):The nputnodes for the SEMANP 
network were constituted by four binary values 
that represented the statu ofur semantic pa-
rameters (telicity, volitionality, dynamicity, and 
directed motion) for each verb. Each semantic 
parameter provided a binary value (either 0 or1) 
to one f the input nodes. The of the input 
nodes were determined by applying follow-
ing tests for the relevant semantic aspects: (1) 
/for an hur test for telicty (e.g th preto 
talk *in/fo ah sw t vb talk is
atelic whereas the phrase to wilt in/*for an hour 
shows that the verb wil is teic), (2 on purpose
test for vlitionality, (3) hala‘stl’ test fr dy-
namicity, (4) and the dative test (i.e., acceptabil-
ity fadding a dative term tothe verb) for di-
rected motion.
   The construction ofan input attern fr SE-
MANP isexmpliedi(2) for theunacsa-
tive verbsol‘wilt’. 
 
(22) A sample input pattern for DIAG. 
a. Telic :1 
b.Non-volitonal :0
c. dynamic 
d. diret motion :0
 
Accordingly, the input atern for the verb sol
‘wilt’ is schematically shown below.
1 0  0 
4.3 The
Training Phase 
The network as trained by providing patterns 
for 52 verbs that are recognized as unaccusa-
tivesin the SI literature or placed closer to the 
unaccusative end rather than the unergativend 
of the Auxilary Selection Hierarchy (ASH, So-
race, 2000); and 52 verbs that are recognized to 
be unaccusative in the SI literature or placed 
closer to the unergative end rather than the un-
accusative end of the ASH. s a result, a total 
of 104 input paterns, each compsed of eight 
nodes, were used o train the DIAG model and 
104 i patterns, each composed of four nodes, 
were usd orain the SEMANP model. The 
116
single output node was set to 0 if the vrb with 
thgiven input attern asunaccusative and 
was eto1 if the vrb was urgativ. Super-
vised learning method as used, as employed 
by the backpropagation algorithm. 
   One hiden layer with a variable nmber of 
hidden units was used (se blow fr th analy-
sis of model parameters). Sigmoid activaton 
function, shown in (23), as used for odeling 
the activation fuction. 
 
(23)   
x
e
f
−
+
=
1
)(
 
 
The number of maximum iterations per epoch 
was set to 20. The sysm sensvty was de-
fined by a global variabl (ε=0.1)hic
cided whetr the loops inthe code nerge or 
not.
4.4 The
Test Phase 
The DIAG and SEMANP models were tested 
by providing the following input patterns: 
   Group A: five vrbs tha are eih recog-
nized as unaccusatives in the SI lterature or 
placed closer to he unaccusative end rather than 
the unergative end of the ASH. 
   Group B: Five vrbs that are eithr recog-
nized as unergatves in he SI lerature or 
placed closer to he unergative end rather than 
the unaccusative end of the ASH. 
   Group C: Three verbs that are reported to 
exhibit variable behavior within the AS. 
   After the training, the networks provided the 
binary outputs for the est verbs, which showed 
whethr ates vrb wasunacstive orunerga-
tive according to the models. 
5 Results

The results are presented in the two sections 
below, separately for the DIAG model and for 
the SEMANP model. 
5.1 The
DIAG Model 
After the training of the network and the opti-
mization of the number of hiden uits and the 
learning rate, the DIAG mol classified all 
verbs in Grop A as unacustiv. T mol 
also classified all Group-B verbs as unergatives. 
Finaly, the model categorized three Group-C 
verbs that were reported toshowvariable be-
havior (kana‘bleed’, parla‘ine’ adüş
‘be, feel cold’) as unacuti verbs n Turkish.
   The distribution of weights after the training 
showed that the –mIş prpl rciv the 
highest weight, hich indicates that the –mIş
participle is the most relable diagnostics for 
analyzing unaccusative/unergative distinction in 
Turkish. 
5.2 The
SEMANP Model 
 SEMANP model casifedtwo f the 
Group-A verbs(namey, gir‘ntr’ ayetiş
‘grow’) as unaccusatives and the three remain-
ing erbs (dur‘mi, sta’, kal‘sal, sty, 
and varol-xt’) a uergiv. The mod
also classified four of five Group-B verbs (gül
‘laugh’, sırıt-grin,söylenut’,yakın
‘complain’) as unergatives and the remaining 
verb (yüz‘swim’) as uacstive. Finally, the 
model categorzed thre Group-C verbs (kana
‘bleed’, parl‘hine’ and üş ‘b, fl cod’)
as unacusative verbs in Turkish. 
The distribution of weights after the training 
showed that among the four semantic parame-
ters that were selected inthis study, telicity r
ceived the highest eight, hich indicates that 
unaccusative and unergative verbs are most sen-
sitive to he telicity aspect of the vrb in Turkish. 
5.3 Evaluation
of Model Parametes 
Four model design parameters, their nitial val-
ues and acceptable ranges after optmizaton are 
discussed below. 
   The number ofhidden units: The number of 
hidden layers was set to1 as a non-variable de-
sign parameter of the network. initial num-
ber of hidden unis as set to3. Keeping the 
learning rate (η=-0.25) and the momentum erm 
(λ=0.25) constant, the number of hidden units 
was adjuste and the baviorf the ntwork
obrv.Tnlyse weda he 
optimum range for the number of hidden units 
was etwen 2ad 6. 
   The larning rate: The learning rate was ini-
tiallyset to η=-0.25. Keeping the number of 
hidden units (hidn_siz=3) and momen-
tum term (λ0.25) cotant, adjusting th lar
117
ing rate between η=-0.005 and η=-0.9 did not 
have an effect on the result. 
   The momentum term: The momentum term 
waseto λ=0.25 inaly.Keeping the number 
of hidden units (hidden_size=3) and he learn-
ing rate (η-0.25) constant, adjusting tmo-
mentum term between λ=0.01 and λ=1.0 did not 
have an effect on he results. However, the sys-
tem did not coverge to a slution fr o-
mentum term qual to and greatrhan λ=1.0. 
6 Discuion

A major findig of the sugestd moel istha 
the predictiosfthe twomelsare compati-
blwith he UH (Perlmutter, 1978) in that they 
divide most intransitive verbs in two, as ex-
pected. Furthermore, the differences between 
the decisions of th dagtic-based DIAG 
model and the semantparameters-based 
SEMANP modelreflect a reported finding 
the unaccusativity literature, i.e., the tests used 
to differentiate between unaccusatives an 
unergatives do not uniformly delegate allverbs 
to the same classes(the solutio ofwhy such 
mismatches occur in Turkish is beyond the 
scope of histudy, see Sorace, 2000; Randall, 
2007, for some sugstion). More specifically, 
the ree Grop-A verb thawee pdicte as
unaccusative by the DIAGmodeland unerga-
tive by the SEMANP odl (dur‘rmain, sty’, 
kal‘stal, s anvarol-xist’) are stative 
verbs, which are known to showiconsistent 
behavior in the literature and classified as vari-
able-verbs by Sorace (2000). An un-
expected finding isthe Group-B verb (yüz
‘swim’), which is predicted as unergative by the 
DIAG moel an uacsative by the SEMANP 
model. This sems to rflt the rol of seman-
tic parameters ther an telicity (namely, dy-
namicity and directed motion) in Turkish. The 
remaining nine verbs of thirteen tested verbs 
were pdicted to be of the same type (either 
unaccusative or unergative) by both mdels. 
   Another finding of the model is the alignment 
between the mostweighted syntactic diagnos-
tics for unaccusative/unergative distinction in
Turkish, namely the –mIş partcple whc re-
ceived the highest eight after the training, and 
the most weighted semantic arameter, namely 
telicity.  
7 Conclusion
and Future Rsarch 
This study contributes to our understanding of 
the distinction in several respects. 
   Firstly, it props a nol cmputaionl ap-
proach hat ackles the unaccusative/unergative 
distincton in Turkish. The model confirms that 
a split between unaccusative andunergative 
verbs indeed exists in Turkish but that the divi-
sion s not clear-cut. The model sggests that 
certain verbs (e.g., staive vrb) beha incon-
sistently, as mentioned n most ccounts in the 
literature. Moreover, the odel reflects a corre-
spondence between syntactic diagnostics and 
semantics, hich supports the view that unaccu-
sativity issemantically determinedansyntacti-
cally manifested (Permutter, 1978, Levin & 
Rappaport-Hova, 195). Since this aproch
uses relevant language-dependentfeatures, its 
particularly applicable to languages that lack 
explicit syntactic diagnostics of SI. 
   The computational approach is based on the 
connectionist paradigm which employs feed-
forward artificial neuralnetworks with aback-
propagaton gorithm. There are severaldimen-
sions in which he model il further be devel-
oped. First, treliabilityofnput node values 
wil bestrnghed bycdutigaceptabilty 
judgment experiments with nave spekers, nd 
the traininof the moel will be imroved 
increasg e nuber f verbs ued for training. 
Acceptability judgments are inflenced not only 
by verbs but also by other constituents in 
clauses or sentences; therefore the nput data 
wil beimproved tinvol different seof 
verbs under various sentental costructions. 
Second, altrnative classifiers,such as decsion 
treesandnaïve Bayes, as well as the classifiers 
that use iscretized eights may provide more 
informativaccountsof the findings of SI in 
Turkish. These alternatives il be investigated 
in further studies.  
   Acknowlegements We thank Cem 
Bozşahin nd thre anoymous reviwers for 
their helpful coments and sugestios. All 
remaining errors are ours. 
 
 
118
Refernces 
Alxiadou, Artmis, Anagnostpulo, Elena, d 
EveretMarin (ed.). 204. Theunaccusativty
puzzle: Exploratons of the syntax-lexicon ntr-
face.Oxford UnivrsityPres. 
Andersn, Jame, and Ronfld, Eward. 198. 
Neuocmputig:Fouatiosfresearch MIT
Prs. 
Aranovich, Raúl (ed.). 207. Split auxiliary systems. 
Amsterdam/Pialphia: JonBejamins. 
Burzio, Luig. 1986. Italia syntax: A Govermnt-
Binding approach. Dordrecht: Reidl. 
Hertz, John, Krog, Anders, and Palr, Richard G.
1991.Introduction tothe eory of neural compu-
tatio. Adis-Wesley, Maschuset. 
Hirakwa, Makio. 19. L2aqiton fJapnes 
unaccusative verbs by speakers of English and 
Chines. InThe acquisiton of japanese asa se-
cond language, ed. Kazue ano, 89-113. Am-
sterdam: Joh Bjmins.
Hoektr, Teun, ad Muler, René. 1990. Unergati-
ves as copularverbs: Locationaland existential 
predication. The Linguistic Review 7: 1-79. 
Keler, Fank. 20. Gradienc igrammar: Expe-
rimental andcomputatioal aspects of degrees of 
grammaticalty. Univrsity ofEdinburhiserta-
tion. 
Kishimoto, Hideki. 196. Split nrasitvy inJapa-
nese and he Unaccusatve Hypothesis.Language 
72: 248-286. 
Legendre, Géraldine. 2007. On the ypology of auxi-
liary slection. Lingua 117:1522-1540. 
vin, Beth, and Rappaport-Hova, Malk. 195. 
Unacusivty the synxleicl semnticsin-
terfae. MIT Pres.
Libe, R., and Baayen, H.1997. Asemantic princi-
ple of auxiliary selection in Dutch. Natural Lan-
guage and Linguistc Theory 15: 789-845. 
McFaden, Thomas. 207. Auxilary selction. n-
guage and Linguistics Compass 1/6: 674-708.
Mithun, Mariane. 19. ctive/agntive case mr-
king and ts otivatons.Language 67: 510-546. 
Nakipoğlu, Mine. 198. Split nrasitvy and the 
syntax-semantcs interface n Turkish,Minneapo-
lis: Univrsity of Minnesota dissertatio. 
Nakipoğlu-Demiralp, i. 201. h refntial 
properties of the implcitarguments of impersonal
passive constructons. In The verb in Turkish, ed. 
E. Eser Taylan, 129-150, John Bejamins. 
Oshita, Hioyuki. 197. T uactive trap: L2 
acquisition of English ntransitive verbs. Unisi-
ty of Sthern California dissertation 
Özkargöz, İnci Z.1986. The rlatiol strucre of
Turkish yntax,San Digo:Univery of Calir-
nia dissertation. 
Perlmutter, David M. 1978. Impersonal passives and 
th UncustiveHypothesis. In Procedings of
Forth Anl eting ofthe Berkeley Lingui-
stics Society, ed. Farrell Ackerman etal., 157-189. 
Randal, J.207. Parmetrizd uxilry selction: 
A fie-grained interacton of features and nking 
rules. In Splt auxiliary systems, e. Raúl Arao-
vich, 207-236.John Benjamins. 
Richa, Srisht. 2008. Unacustivy, unergativy 
and the causative alternation n Hndi:A mnia-
list nlysis. New Dlh: Jrl Nh Ui-
versity dissertation. 
Rosen, Carol G.1984. The intrface btween sman-
ticrolesandinitial gramticalrelations.In Stu-
dies in relational gramar, ds. Crol G. Rosen 
and David M.Perlutter. University of hicago 
Pres. 
Sezr, Engin. 1991. Issues in Turkish syntax. Cam-
bridge:Harvard University dissertation.
Sorace, Antonela. 2000. Graents in auxiliary se-
letionwith intransitivevrb. Language 76: 859-
890. 
Sorace, Antonela, nd Shomura, Yoko. 2001. Lexi-
calconstrais on the acquisition of splitntransit
vity. Evidence from L2 Japanese. Studies in Se-
cond Language Acquisition 23: 247-278. 
van Valin, Robert D., Jr.1990. Semantic parameters 
of spltransiiviy.Language 66: 221-260. 
Zaenen, Annie. 1988. Unacusative rbs in Dutch 
and the syntax-semantics nterface.CSLIReports 
88-123, CSLI, Stanford niversity 
Zaenen, Annie. 1993. Unacusativiy in Dutch: Inte-
grating syntax and lexical semantcs. ISematics 
and the lexicon, d. JamesPutejovsky. ordrecht: 
Kluwer Acaemic Publihr. 
119

