Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, pages 17–24,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics 
Identifying Asertions in Text and Discourse: 
The Presentational Relative Clause Construction 
 
Cecily Jill Duffield, Jena D. Hwang,  and Laura A. Michaelis   
Department of Linguistics, Institute of Cognitive Science 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Boulder, CO 80309 USA 
{cecily.dufield, hwangd, laura.michaelis}@colorado.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
In this paper we investigate the Presentational 
Relative Clause (PRC) construction. In both the 
linguistic and NLP literature, relative clauses 
have ben considered to contain background 
information that is not directly relevant or highly 
useful in semantic analysis. In text 
sumarization in particular, the information 
contained in the relative clauses is often 
removed, being viewed as non-central content to 
the topic or discourse. We discus the 
importance of distinguishing the PRC 
construction from other relative clause types. 
We show that in the PRC, the relative clause, 
rather than the main clause, contains the 
asertion of the uterance. Based on linguistic 
analysis, we sugest informative features that 
may be used in automatic extraction of PRC 
constructions. We believe that identifying this 
construction wil be useful in discriminating 
central information from peripheral. 
1 Introduction

Identifying and extracting relevant information in a 
given text is an important task for human readers 
and natural language procesing aplications.  To 
do this, proper identification and treatment of 
complex sentences containing relative clauses and 
other embeded structures such as apositive 
clauses (e.g., My mother, a patient at the center, 
met him last year,) and participial clauses (e.g., 
Once he ate Werthers, including the wraper,) is 
necesary. 
Thus, the tasks of text simplification and text 
sumarization in NLP have focused their eforts 
on finding efective ways of simplifying long and 
complex sentences into shorter and simpler ones. 
This has in turn proven useful in machine 
translation (Chandrasekar et. al., 196), parsing 
and information extraction (Chandrasekar and 
Srinivas, 197), as wel as document simplification 
designed to make texts acesible to wider 
audiences. Such audiences include readers at low 
literacy levels (Sidharthan, 203), second 
language learners (Petersen and Ostendorf, 207) 
and aphasic readers (Devilin and Unthank, 206). 
The goal of text simplification and 
sumarization is to reduce syntactic or structural 
complexities while preserving the central meaning 
or relevant information in the given text. 
Unfortunately, syntactic simplification algorithms 
often asume a uniform treatment of syntactic 
structures. This is especialy true in the domain of 
relative clauses. 
Relative clauses are often considered to contain 
parenthetical information. That is, their putative 
role in the sentence is to provide background 
information about the mentioned entity or entities. 
Consider (1):
 1
 
 
(1) You [get] a guy down the stret who comes 
up, uh, carying a knife.
2
 
                                                
1
 Relative clauses are shown in boldface and the referent noun 
phrase is underlined. The matrix verb, the verb of the sentence 
in which the relative clause is embeded, is in brackets. 
2
 Unles otherwise noted, al examples in this paper are taken 
from the Switchboard Trebank corpus (Godfrey et al. 192, 
Marcus et al. 193), a syntacticaly parsed version of the 
Switchboard corpus of American English telephone 
conversations. 
17
 
 
Acording to the above definition of relative 
clauses, they key information in (1) is in the main 
clause You get a guy down the stret. That is, (1) 
means something like: the entity you comes to 
poses a guy down the stret. If we acordingly 
consider the relative clause as the background or 
incidental information and remove it from the 
semantic analysis, the asertion – the key piece of 
the information – would be lost. 
In this paper, we discus the Presentational 
Relative Clause (PRC) construction, as sen in (1). 
In the PRC, the relative clause, rather than the 
main clause, contains the asertion of the uterance 
(Dufield & Michaelis, 209).  Moreover, we 
analyze the construction in detail to ases its 
potential usefulnes in NLP aplications. Based on 
linguistic analysis, we sugest features that may be 
useful for implementation of automatic 
identification of PRC constructions. We believe 
that the identification of this construction wil be 
useful in discriminating central information units 
from the peripheral ones. 
2 Relative
Clauses 
Relative clauses are constructions in which a 
verbal clause modifies a nominal element, the 
“head,” as shown in (2) and (3): 
 
(2) I [like] cars that ___ are designed with human 
beings in mind. 
(3) I [like] those movies that you watch __ time 
and time again. 
 
In (2), the relative clause that are designed with 
human beings in mind describes the head nominal 
cars, while in (3), the head nominal those movies is 
described by the relative clause that you watch 
time and time again. The gap in the relative clause 
indicating the position of the co-referential noun 
phrase is shown. 
Relative clauses are typicaly embeded in main 
clauses, with the result that the nominal element 
satisfies a semantic-role requirement of two 
diferent verbs. For example, consider sentence 
(2), where the head nominal cars serves as an 
argument of the verb like while a gap that shares its 
referent with the head nominal marks the argument 
of the pasive verb designed. Likewise, in (3) the 
referent shared by the head nominal those movies 
in the main clause and the gap in the relative clause 
satisfies the requirements of two separate verbs, 
like and watch. 
2.1 Types
of Relative Clauses 
In the linguistic tradition, relative clauses are 
typicaly clasified into restrictive and non-
restrictive types, as sen in (4-5), respectively. 
 
(4) And, you know, I [want] a car that I can work on 
__, because I think it just costs to much even 
to get the oil changed anymore. 
(5) And once you’ve [reached] the river walk area, 
which __ is the tourist area, it’s usualy prety 
safe during the day. 
 
In (4), the speaker has aserted that he would like a 
car; the restrictive relative clause specifies the type 
of car as one belonging to the set of cars that he 
could work on, as oposed to a type of car that he 
would be unable to repair. In (5), the relative 
clause does not identify the river walk area as one 
out of a set of areas, but simply provides aditional 
information about it.  In neither case does the 
relative clause asert information in the discourse; 
rather, it expreses a presuposed proposition (e.g., 
‘I can work on x,’‘x is the tourist area’) that is 
asumed to be known by both the speaker and the 
adrese. 
Acordingly, relative clauses are asumed to 
provide background information concerning the 
entities they modify. This background material 
serves either to distinguish the referent from others 
of its kind, as in a restrictive relative clause, or 
provide aditional material, as in a non-restrictive 
relative clause, rather than aserting something 
new about the referent. 
2.2 Relative
Clauses in NLP 
In line with the linguistic consensus, work in NLP 
has also viewed relative clauses as expresing 
background information about a referent. In 
syntactic simplification, the structural complexity 
is resolved by spliting a sentence into multiple 
ones (Sidharthan, 203; Chandrasekar, 196). In 
efect, the relative clause is puled out of the main 
clause into an independent sentence. For example, 
(5) would be simplified into (6). 
 
18
 
(6) And once you’ve reached the river walk area, it’s 
usualy prety safe during the day. The river 
walk area is the tourist area. 
 
In text sumarization, where background 
information is considered parenthetical and 
identified with non-key content, relative clauses 
are simply disregarded (Sidharthan et al., 204). 
That is, if we consider the relative clause to contain 
parenthetical information, it is reasonable to 
simply remove the non-key content from the text 
prior to any semantic analysis. 
3 Presentational
Relative Clauses 
As the analysis of (1) above sugests, however, not 
al relative clauses contain parenthetical 
information. In fact, many linguistic studies have 
argued that subordinate clauses can make 
asertions (Goldberg, 206; Men, 1974; 
McCawley, 1981; Fox & Thompson, 190), as a 
counterpoint to the studies that view them as 
expresing exclusively backgrounded information 
(Shibatani, 209). 
Here, in line with Michaelis and Lambrecht 
(196), Kay and Filmore (199) and other work in 
the Construction Gramar tradition, we analyze a 
particular construction, the Presentational Relative 
Clause construction (PRC), as a productive 
idiomatic patern.  The PRC is a construction in 
which the material presented in the relative clause 
is not backgrounded, either in the sense of being 
unecesary parenthetical material, or in the sense 
of being already known to both speaker and 
adrese (Dufield & Michaelis, 209). In the 
PRC, information is aserted in the relative clause 
that modifies the nominal element, which is 
introduced by a semanticaly bleached main clause. 
Examples of the PRC include (1) and the 
folowing: 
 
(7) They [had] some guy that __ was defending 
himself. 
(8) And I [know] people who __have ben drug 
tested and who have not, you know, ben hired 
by a corporation. 
(9) And they've [got] a fiften year old that __'s 
their bos that __ is carying a gun 
 
Each of the examples above were examined in 
their original contexts to determining that an 
uninformative main clause introduces the head 
nominal, while an asertion is contained within the 
relative clause. In (7), the main clause that 
introduces the referent some guy is semanticaly 
uninformative. By this we mean that it does NOT 
asert that the entity they posesed some guy. 
Rather, the aserted proposition in the uterance is 
in the relative clause, and (7) can be paraphrased as 
A guy was defending himself. In (8) the important 
information is not that the speaker knows a certain 
set of people. Instead, the key asertion here is: 
“Some people have ben drug tested and have not 
ben hired by a corporation.”  Likewise, (9), 
ilustrating what might be described as a double-
PRC, could be rephrased as, “A fiften-year-old is 
their bos and is carying a gun.” 
3.1 Anatomy
of the PRC construction 
The PRC construction is typicaly characterized by 
thre main properties: a semanticaly empty main 
clause, a head nominal in the object position of the 
main clause that is newly introduced into the 
discourse, and a subject-gap relative clause that 
modifies the head nominal. 
 
First property: The semanticaly bleached main 
clause serves to convey the restriction on the range 
of the existential quantifier rather than an asertion. 
In (7), for example, the main clause conveys the 
restriction ‘x is a guy’. Consequently, a PRC, 
unlike a restrictive relative, is not optional. It is a 
required part of the clause in which it apears, 
exemplified by the fact that (7) canot reasonably 
be construed as aserting ‘They had some guy’. 
Being uninformative, the main verbs of PRC 
tend to have low semantic weight, as in (10-12). 
 
(10) I've [sen] some statistics that __ say it's more 
expensive to kil somebody than to kep them 
in prison for life. 
(1) You [get] a guy down the stret who __ comes 
up, uh, carying a knife. 
(12) When our kids were smal we [had] a couple of, 
uh, god women who __ would often come to 
the house. 
The bracketed main verbs in (10-12), which 
otherwise denote relations of perception, obtaining, 
and posesion, respectively, here apear simply to 
‘set the stage’ for their object referents. In other 
words, (10) does not asert that the speaker ses 
something, (1) does not asert that the adrese 
19
 
obtains something and (12) does not asert that 
some people posesed someone. Rather than 
predicating a property or action of the main clause 
subject, the main clause predications in (10-12) 
provide an explicit or infered center of perspective 
from which to view the entity denoted by the head 
nominal (Koenig and Lambrecht, 199). 
 
Second property: The discourse-new head 
nominal is in the object position of the main 
clause.  Thus, the PRC enables the speaker to 
avoid violating a hearer-based information-
packaging constraint that Lambrecht (194) refers 
to as the Principle of Separation of Reference and 
Role (PSR): “Do not introduce a referent and talk 
about it in the same clause” (ibid). In other words, 
to aid the hearer in anchoring the new referent in 
discourse, the speaker introduces it in the object 
position of the main clause, and then predicates 
upon it in the relative clause, as in example (13): 
 
(13) Speaker A: We have more options now then 
(sic) we did when my kids were 
born, with being able to take of 
ful-time longer, you can phase your 
schedule in so that it 's not ful-time 
for up to six months. 
Speaker B: Oh boy, that's great. 
Speaker A: It 's realy neat. I've [had] a couple 
of asistants that __ came back 
just thre days a wek or they've, 
you know, whatever schedule they 
want from a pay standpoint. 
 
Consider Speaker A’s second turn, restructured as 
a declarative clause rather than as a PRC, and thus 
violating the PSR. This time the asertion is 
conveyed in the main clause, but with the new 
entity in the in the subject position the result is 
pragmaticaly awkward: 
 
(14) Speaker A: It 's realy neat. A couple of 
asistants came back just thre days 
a wek or they've, you know, 
whatever schedule they want from a 
pay standpoint. 
 
An aditional example is provided in (15): 
 
(15) Speaker B: I’ve never liked D.C. a whole lot 
and a realy hate the Redskins. And 
a lot of it's because, you know, I 
[got] a lot of people, you know, at 
work with and everything that _ 
are big Redskin fans. (?A lot of 
people I work with and everything 
are big Redskin fans.) 
 
Thus, a crucial identifying characteristic of the 
PRC is that it always modifies head nominals that 
are main-clause objects. 
 
Third property: Third identifying property of the 
PRC is the presence of a subject-gap relative 
clause.  That is, the relative clause modifying the 
head nominal contains a gap in the subject position 
of the relative clause that is co-referential with the 
head nominal, as in (7) repeated here as (16): 
 
(16) They [had] some guy that __ was defending 
himself. 
There are, however, cases in which the head 
nominal is modified by an object-gap relative 
clause, which conveys an asertion, as in (17): 
 
(17) Everybody [gets] five pounds of garbage that 
they can throw away__ you know uh but 
more than that every wek uh you’ve got to 
pay by the pound. 
In the example above, as with the more 
prototypical subject-gap PRC, the main clause 
does not make an asertion (in this case, the main 
clause does not asert that everybody receives five 
pounds of garbage).  Rather, the asertion in the 
relative clause is demonstrated by the apropriate 
paraphrase, “Everybody can throw away five 
pounds of garbage.” While speakers do produce 
object-gap sentences to convey asertions, subject-
gap PRC tokens acount for the majority of 
asertoric relative clauses in spoken discourse 
(Dufield and Michaelis, 209). This results in the 
subject-gap structure being a useful property for 
identifying prototypical instances of the PRC. 
4 Why
identify the PRC construction? 
As argued above, identifying the PRC is important 
because, unlike restrictive and non-restrictive 
relative clauses, the PRC does not present 
backgrounded or parenthetical information. Rather, 
the los of information aserted in a PRC results in 
the los of inferences crucial for the discourse.  
20
 
4.1 “My son is an animal lover.” 
So far we have sen sentences or uterances that 
would inarguably be interpreted as sentences 
containing a PRC. However, there are PRCs, 
which, while equiped with every relevant PRC 
characteristic, initialy apear to contain relative 
clauses expresing parenthetical information. 
Consider the folowing sentence: 
 
(18) I [had] a son, he’s now gone from the home, 
that __ was an animal lover. 
In isolation, (18) could be interpreted as aserting 
that the speaker has a son, who now hapens to 
have left home. The relative clause that was an 
animal lover would be treated as background 
information about the son. Yet an examination of 
the context of the conversation reveals that the 
relative clause contains crucial information with 
regard to the discourse as a whole: 
 
(19) Speaker A: Do you want to hear about my 
other animals I've had? 
Speaker B: Sure, sure. 
Speaker A: I've had a skunk 
Speaker B: Yeah. 
Speaker A: I've had a Burmese python, 
I've had rats, I’ve had mice. 
Speaker B: Wow. 
Speaker A: Uh, let's se, I've had gerbils, I 
have, I [had] a son, he’s now 
gone from the home, that __ 
was an animal lover. 
Speaker B: Uh-huh. 
Speaker A: So at one point I had a snake, 
skunk, dog and a cat runing lose 
in the house. 
 
In this case, we se even a more compeling reason 
to identify this sentence as a PRC. Disregarding 
the relative clause in (18) and treating the main 
clause as containing an aserted proposition, 
results in a radicaly diferent reading: the 
speaker’s son is among the animals that the 
speaker claims to have owned (i.e. “I’ve had a 
skunk, I’ve had a Burmese python, I’ve had rats, 
I’ve had mice, I’ve had gerbils, I had a son…”). By 
clasifying this sentence as a PRC, we reach the 
intended asertion, “My son was an animal lover,” 
which in turn explains why the speaker has ben 
the proud owner of a menagerie of animals. 
4.2 Other
examples 
Much like the example in (18), the discourse 
context of the other PRCs presented in this paper 
substantiates the claim that they present 
information central to the discourse.  The PRC in 
(7) “They [had] some guy that was defending 
himself,” used in a conversation describing a trial, 
signals that the situation departs from the 
prototypical courtrom schema in a crucial respect 
(the defendant is without a lawyer). 
Other instances of the PRC, such as (8) “And I 
[know] people who __have ben drug tested 
and who have not, you know, ben hired by a 
corporation,” like (18), provide explanatory 
information: the reason for the speaker’s negative 
view of drug-testing. Finaly, in (15) “I [got] a lot 
of people, you know, at work with and everything 
that __ are big Redskin fans,” the PRC 
uterance explains why the speaker dislikes a 
particular fotbal team. Treating these clauses as 
background information, restricting categories of 
entities, or removing them from semantic analysis 
results in the los of information about causal 
conections in the text.  
5 Identifying
the PRC construction 
Thus far we have presented the identifying 
linguistic properties of the PRC constructions. We 
wil now demonstrate how these properties (se 
Section 3.1) lend themselves to features that could 
be useful for automatic identification and 
clasification of PRCs. For the purposes of this 
section we make the asumption that we wil only 
retain instances that can be parsed by an automatic 
parser (Colins 199, Charniak, 197).  The 
features we sugest are based on the results of a 
corpus study caried out by Dufield and Michaelis 
(in prep) examining the role of the PRC in the 
distribution of relative clause types in spoken 
discourse. 
5.1 The
distribution of the PRC in discourse 
In the study by Dufield and Michaelis (209, in 
prep), 100 sentences (50 each of subject-gap and 
object-gap relative clauses) from the Switchboard 
Corpus (Godfrey, 196) were manualy examined 
for the first two of the identifying properties of 
PRC tokens as described in Section 3.1. In 
adition, each of the 100 sentences was examined 
21
 
within a context of 50 lines of previous discourse 
to determine whether or not the relative clause 
conveyed an asertion.  
Their results showed that thre properties, 
namely, a semanticaly bleached verb, discourse-
new head nominals, and an asertion in the relative 
clause, were found to significantly predict relative 
clauses of the subject-gap type, sugesting that 
PRCs acount for the prevalence of subject-gap 
relative clauses in discourse. In fact, 2.4% of 
subject-gap relative clauses were PRCs, while only 
6.8% of object-gap relative clauses displayed 
features of the PRC.  The maner in which 
Dufield and Michaelis manualy anotated their 
data, although based on linguistic analysis as 
discused above, easily lends itself to a list of 
properties that could be automaticaly used to 
identify PRCs in larger corpora. 
5.2 Verb
in the main clause 
Coresponding to the first property (Section 3.1) of 
a semanticaly empty main clause, Dufield & 
Michaelis have observed that PRC tokens have the 
tendency to co-ocur with verbs of existence, 
perception and discovery. Table 1 lists these verbs. 
 
Be Get Se Hear Tel 
Have Find Know Lok Wonder 
Table 1: Main-clause verbs likely to apear in PRCs. 
This sugests that encoding the lematized verbs 
as features may help in automatic clasification of 
PRCs. 
5.3 Position
of head nominal 
The head nominal of the relative clause was found 
to ocur in two positions relative to the main-
clause verb. It was either the second argument of 
the main-clause verb (20) or the complement in the 
prepositional phrase (21), which in turn was the 
second argument of the main-clause verb. 
 
(20) They [had] {some guy that __ was defending 
himself.}-NP 
(21) I have a friend who was [teling] me {about her 
brother who __ gets high al the time.}-P 
Dufield and Michaelis also observed that there 
was a corelation betwen the main-clause verb 
and the position in which the head nominal was 
found. That is, the verbs such as lok, tel, and 
wonder were regularly found when the head 
nominal was the complement in the P, while 
other verbs in Table 1 more frequently ocured 
with the head nominal in the direct argument 
position of the main-clause verb. 
 Furthermore, Dufield and Michaelis found that 
in cases where the head nominal was the 
complement of the P, the head of the P was 
found to be either of or about. 
 This sugests that in conjunction with the 
features derived from the lematized verb, the 
position of the head nominal in relation to the 
main-clause verb could be encoded as a feature. 
That is, for each of the sentences examined, a 
feature can be coded for either a NP complement 
or P complement, given which type of 
complement the relative clause sits in. 
In adition to the position of the head nominal, 
for those relative clauses that are found in the P 
complement a feature can also be coded for the 
preposition heading the phrase. 
5.4 Head
nominal: noun and modifiers 
Coresponding to the second property (Section 3.1) 
of PRCs, discourse-new status of modified head 
nominals, is indefinite form. Although Dufield & 
Michaelis recognize that the distinction betwen 
the ‘given’ and ‘new’ discourse statuses is not the 
same thing as definite versus indefinite form, 
discourse-active entities tend to be formaly 
marked as definite, while discourse-new entities 
tend to be marked as indefinite (Prince 192). 
Head nominals considered as indefinite include 
bare plural nouns (e.g., enginers), determinerles 
nominals modified by adjectives or cardinal 
numbers (e.g., about forty kindergarteners), bare 
mas nouns (e.g., material), nominals with weak 
quantifiers (e.g., some companies), indefinite 
pronouns (e.g., somebody, anybody) and nominals 
containing the indefinite article a (e.g., a fish).  
Definite head nominals include those containing 
the definite article the (e.g., the thing, the 
resources), demonstrative determiners (e.g., this 
recording, that atitude), posesive determiners 
(e.g., my bas), strong quantifiers (e.g., every story, 
al these people), demonstrative pronouns (e.g., 
that, those) and proper nouns (e.g., Rockport, 
Albany). Partitive nominal expresions with 
22
 
indefinite heads (e.g., one of those things, some of 
my friends) are also considered as indefinite. 
To turn the above into linguistic features that are 
characteristic of definite and indefinite head 
nominals, we sugest a number of posible features 
for clasification. Several of these relating to the 
head noun phrase may contribute to the 
identification of PRCs: 
 
Head nominal features: 
the phrasal categories of the sisters to the 
noun in the head noun phrase. These features 
wil encode the presence of any adjectival or 
prepositional phrases within the head noun 
phrase. The inclusion of these features wil 
acount for the existence of any adjectival 
modification on the head noun phrase and/or 
partitive nominals. 
the existence of named entities in the head 
noun phrase to ascertain the existence of any 
proper nouns in the head nominal. 
 
Head nominal features encoding: 
whether or not the nominal is a pronoun. This 
wil serve to introduce the indefinite and 
demonstrative pronouns into the clasification 
of PRCs. 
singularity/plurarity of the head nominal. 
 
Modifier features encoding: 
articles and determiners, 
quantifiers, and 
posesive pronouns that modify the head 
noun or noun phrase.  
5.5 Gap
in the relative clause 
The third and final property shared by PRCs 
concerns the gap in the relative clause. The gap 
ocurs in subject position and is co-referential with 
the head nominal. This can be identified in the 
syntactic parses by the presence of a trace in the 
syntactic position co-indexed
3
 with the relative 
pronouns that, who, or which. 
                                                
3 Note
that coindexation is distinct from coreference. In 
Trebank, coindexation involves the creation of a syntactic 
link betwen the trace and the constituent that was moved out 
of the position trace now ocupies. Coreference is the 
relationship betwen the gap and the referent. Most parsers, 
however, do not suply co-indexation. 
 The syntactic position of the gap can be coded 
as a feature. These would also include a feature for 
cases where the gap is entirely mising from the 
relative clause. This is to acount for cases of 
relative clauses containing a pronoun in the 
position where the gap should be (e.g. The gap in 
this example is filed with the pronoun it: “Here[’s] 
a journal that I’m in the board of it.”). 
5.6 Subject
position of matrix clause 
In adition to the above features, based on Dufield 
& Michaelis’ characterization of the PRC, there is 
one other syntactic characteristic worth 
investigating—the subject of the matrix clause. 
Consider the folowing PRCs: 
 
(2) They [had] some guy that __ was defending 
himself. 
(23) There[’s] a lot of people that fal into that 
category 
(24) It [was] a moving man __ puled right up to 
her house, broke in and stole everything she 
owned
4
. 
General observation of PRCs is that they sem to 
display a tendency to have either a pronoun (2), 
or an expletive there (23) or it (24) in the subject 
position of the matrix clause. This sugests that the 
lexical content of the subject position may be a 
useful predictor for PRC clasification. 
6 Discussion
and Conclusion 
In this paper, we have presented identifying 
properties of the PRC construction. We recognize 
that individual properties as presented here 
contribute to but do not determine the final 
meaning of the PRC construction as a whole, but in 
combination, they are likely predictors. Not al 
syntactic forms can be treated in the same way. By 
not privileging the syntactic level, but rather 
treating lexical, morphological, and syntactic 
features equaly, we are able to identify key 
indicators that could be used to identify the 
function of a relative clause in discourse as 
conveying an asertion as oposed to 
backgrounded information.  
                                                
4
 Certain types of PRCs, such as in this example, are produced 
without the relative pronoun. Such PRCs are refered to as 
amalgams (se Lambrecht, 198 for discusion) 
23
 
For the purposes of NLP, we must work within 
the framework of phrasal structures, constrained by 
the resources curently available. Yet as we have 
sugested here, those resources, although not 
constructionaly based, can be used to identify 
constructions for the purpose of extracting relevant 
information from naturaly ocuring data. We 
have further investigated the aplicability of a 
construction-based aproach to identifying relative 
clause types when the individual components, such 
as lexical items themselves are not themselves 
efective predictors. This clause-level information 
alows for richer representations of textual 
meaning. 
Our future plans include experiments with 
implementing automatic clasifiers of relative 
clause type based on these features. Such empirical 
study wil give us a beter understanding of the 
degre of usefulnes of these features in 
identifying PRCs in text data. We anticipate that 
aditional features wil be discovered during the 
implementation proces. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Martha Palmer, Jim 
Martin, Jinho Choi, Susan Brown, Les Sikos, and 
Steve Duman for valuable fedback. 
 
References 
 
Chandrasekar, Raman, and Bangalore Srinivas. 197. 
Automatic Induction of Rules for Text 
Simplification. Knowledge-Based Systems, 10(3): 
183-190. 
Chandrasekar, Raman, Christine Doran, and Bangalore 
Srinivas. 196. Motivations and Methods for Text 
Simplification. In Procedings of the 16
th
 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 196), pages 1041-104, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Charniak, Eugene. 200. A Maximum-Entropy-Inspired 
Parser. In Procedings of NACL0, pages 132-139, 
Seatle, WA, USA. 
Colins, Michael John. 199. Head-Driven Statistical 
Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis, 
University of Pensylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 
Devlin, Siobhan, and Gary Unthank. 206. Helping 
Aphasic People Proces Online Information. In 
Procedings of the Eighth International ACM 
SIGACES Conference on Computers and 
Acesibility, pages 25-26, Portland, OR, USA. 
Dufield, Cecily Jil and Laura A. Michaelis. 209. Why 
Subject Relatives Prevail: Constraints versus 
Constructional Licensing. Presented at the 209 
Anual Meting of the Linguistics Society of 
America. San Francisco. CA, USA 
Dufield, Cecily Jil and Laura A. Michaelis. in prep. 
Why Subject Relatives Prevail: Constraints versus 
Constructional Licensing. 
Kay, Paul and Charles J. Filmore. 199. Gramatical 
Constructions and Linguistic Generalizations: the 
What's X doing Y? Construction. Language, 75(1):1-
3. 
Fox, Barbara, and Sandra Thompson. 190. A 
Discourse Explanation of the Gramar of Relative 
Clauses in English Conversation. Language 6:51-64 
Goldberg, Adele E. 206. Constructions at work. The 
nature of generalization in language. Oxford 
University Pres, Oxford. 
Men, Lise. 1974. Asertions not made by the main 
clause of a sentence. Studies in the Linguistic 
Sciences (University of Ilinois) 4(1):132-143. 
Koenig, Jean-Piere and Knud Lambrecht. 199. French 
Relative Clauses as Secondary Predicates. In Francis 
Corbin, Carmen Dobrovie-Sorin, and Jean-Marie 
Marandin, editors, Empirical isues in Formal Syntax 
and Semantics 2. Thesus, pages 191-214, The Hague, 
The Netherlands. 
Lambrecht, Knud. 194. Information structure and 
sentence form: Topic, focus, and the mental 
representation of discourse referents. In Cambridge 
Studies in Linguistics 71. Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Pres. 
Lambrecht, Knud. 198. There was a Farmer had a Dog: 
Syntactic Amalgams Revisited. In S. Axmaker, A. 
Jaiser and H. Singmaster, editors, The Procedings 
of the Fourtenth Anual Meting of the Berkeley 
Linguistics Society. BLS, Inc., pages 319-39 
Berkeley, CA. 
McCawley, James D. 1981. The Syntax and Semantics 
of English Relative Clauses. Lingua, 53: 9-149. 
Michaelis, Laura A. and Knud Lambrecht. 196. The 
Exclamative Sentence Type in English. In Adele 
Goldberg, editor, Conceptual Structure, Discourse 
and Language. Center for the Study of Language and 
Information, pages 375-389, Stanford, CA. 
Petersen, Sarah E. and Mari Ostendorf. 207. Text 
simplification for language learners: a corpus 
analysis. In SLaTE-207, pages 69-72, Farmington, 
PA. 
Sidharthan, Advaith. 203. Syntactic simplification 
and Text Cohesion. Ph.D. thesis, University of 
Cambridge, UK. 
Sidharthan, Advaith, Ani Nenkova and Kathlen 
McKeown. 204. Syntactic Simplification for 
Improving Content Selection in Multi-Document 
Sumarization. In Procedings of the 20th 
International Conference on Computational 
Linguistics (COLING 204), Geneva, Switzerland. 
24

