Proceedings of the Workshop on Negation and Speculation in Natural Language Processing, pages 1–4,
Uppsala, July 2010.
Zonesofconceptualisationinscientificpapers:a windowtonegative and
speculative statements
MariaLiakata
DepartmentofComputingScience,AberystwythUniversity
EuropeanBioinformaticsInstitute,Cambridge
liakata@ebi.ac.uk
Abstract
In view of theincreasingneedto facilitate
processingthecontentofscientificpapers,
wepresentanannotationschemeforanno-
tatingfull paperswithzonesof conceptu-
alisation,reflectingthe informationstruc-
tureandknowledgetypeswhichconstitute
ascientificinvestigation.Thelatterarethe
Core Scientific Concepts (CoreSCs) and
includeHypothesis,Motivation,Goal,Ob-
ject, Background, Method, Experiment,
Model, Observation, Result and Conclu-
sion. The CoreSCschemehas been used
to annotatea corpusof 265 full papersin
physical chemistryand biochemistryand
we are currentlyautomatingthe recogni-
tion of CoreSCs in papers. We discuss
how the CoreSC scheme relates to other
views of scientificpapersand indeedhow
the formercould be used to help identify
negationandspeculationinscientifictexts.
1 Introduction
The recent surge in the numbers of papers pro-
duced, especially in the biosciences, has high-
lighted the need for automaticprocessingmeth-
ods.Workby[Lin(2009)]hasshownthatmethods
suchas informationretrieval are moreeffective if
zones of interest are specifiedwithin the papers.
Various corpora and annotation schemes have
beenproposedfordesignatingavarietyoflinguis-
tic phenomena permeating scientific papers, in-
cluding negation, hedges, dependencies and se-
mantic relations [Vincze et al. (2008); Pyysalo
et al. (2007);MedlockandBriscoe(2007);McIn-
tosh and Curran (2009)]. Other schemesfollow
the argumentation and citation flow within pa-
pers[Teufelet al. (2009);Teufeland Siddharthan
(2007)] or indeed a combinationof some of the
above along multipledimensions[Shatkayet al.(2008)].
In the following we presentthe CoreSCanno-
tation scheme and a corpus with CoreSC anno-
tations. The CoreSCscheme is used at the sen-
tence level to identify the core componentsthat
constitute a scientific investigation. We discuss
how the CoreSCschemerelates to other annota-
tion schemesrepresentingalternateviews of sci-
entificpapersand how CoreSCscouldbe usedto
guide the identificationof negation and specula-
tion.
2 TheCoreSCscheme
The CoreSC annotationscheme adopts the view
thatascientificpaperisthehuman-readablerepre-
sentationofascientificinvestigationandtherefore
seeks to mark the components of a scientific
investigation as expressed in the text. CoreSC
is ontology-motivated and originates from the
CISP meta-data[Soldatova and Liakata (2007)],
a subset of classes from EXPO [Soldatova and
King (2006)], an ontologyfor the description of
scientificinvestigations.CISPconsistsofthecon-
cepts:Motivation, Goal, Object, Method,
Experiment, Observation, Result and
Conclusion, which were validated using an
on-line survey as constituting the indispensable
set of concepts necessary for the description of
a scientific investigation. CoreSC implements
these as well as Hypothesis, Model and
Background, as a sentence-based annotation
scheme for 3-layeredannotation. The first layer
pertains to the previously mentioned 11 cate-
gories, the second layer is for the annotationof
properties of the concepts (e.g. “New”, “Old”)
and the third layer caters for identifiers(concep-
tID), which link together instances of the same
concept, e.g. all the sentencespertainingto the
same method will be linked together with the
sameconceptID(e.g. “Met1”).
If we combine the layers of annotationso as to
1
Table1: TheCoreSCAnnotationscheme
Category Description
Hypothesis A statementnotyetconfirmedratherthana factualstatement
Motivation Thereasonsbehindaninvestigation
Background Generallyacceptedbackgroundknowledgeandpreviouswork
Goal A targetstateoftheinvestigationwhereintendeddiscoveriesaremade
Object-New Anentitywhichis a productormainthemeoftheinvestigation
Object-New-Advantage Advantageofanobject
Object-New-Disadvantage Disadvantageofanobject
Method-New Meansbywhichauthorsseekto achieve a goaloftheinvestigation
Method-New-Advantage Advantageofa Method
Method-New-Disadvantage Disadvantageofa Method
Method-Old A methodmentionedpertainingto previouswork
Method-Old-Advantage Advantageofa Method
Method-Old-Disadvantage Disadvantageofa Method
Experiment Anexperimentalmethod
Model A statementabouta theoreticalmodelorframework
Observation thedata/phenomenarecordedin aninvestigation
Result factualstatementsabouttheoutputsofaninvestigation
Conclusion statementsinferredfromobservations& resultsrelatingto researchhypothesis
give flatlabels,wecaterforthecategoriesintable
1.
TheCoreSCschemewas accompaniedbya setof
45 pageguidelineswhichcontaina decisiontree,
detaileddescriptionof the semanticsof the cate-
gories,6 rulesfor pairwisedistinctionand exam-
ples fromchemistrypapers. Theseguidelinesare
availablefrom http://ie-repository.jisc.ac.uk/88/.
3 TheCoreSCcorpus
We used the CoreSCannotationscheme and the
semanticannotationtoolSAPIENT[Liakataet al.(2009)]toconstructa corpusof265annotatedpa-
pers [Liakataand Soldatova (2009)]from physi-
cal chemistryandbiochemistry. TheCoreSCcor-
pus was developedin two different phases. Dur-
ing phase I, fifteen Chemistryexperts were split
into five groups of three, each of which anno-
tated eight different papers; A 16th expert anno-
tated acrossgroupsas a consistency check. This
resulted in a total of 41 papers being annotated,
all of which received multiple annotations. We
ranked annotatorsaccordingto mediansuccessin
terms of inter-annotatoragreement(as measured
by Cohen’s kappa) both within their groups and
for a paper commonacross groups. In phase II,
the9 bestannotatorsof phaseI eachannotated25
papers,amountingto a totalof225papers.
The CoreSCcorpusis now beingused to train
a classifierfor the automationof Core Scientific
conceptsin papers.
4 CorrelatingCoreSCstootherzonesof
interest
Given theplethoraof annotationschemes,it is in-
terestingtoinvestigatethecorrelationbetweendif-
ferentviewsof scientificpapersandhow different
schemesmap to each other. We recentlylooked
at the correlation between the CoreSC scheme,
whichviews papersas the humanlyreadablerep-
resentationof scientific investigations and seeks
torecovertheinvestigationcomponentswithinthe
paper, and AZ-II[Teufelet al. (2009)],whichas-
sumes a paper is the attemptof claimingowner-
ship for a new piece of knowledge and aims to
recover the rhetorical structure and the relevant
stagesin theargumentation.
By definition, the two schemes focus on differ-
ent aspects of the papers, with CoreSCsprovid-
ing more detail with respectto different types of
methodsand resultsand AZ-IIlookingmostlyat
the appropriationof knowledgeclaims. Basedon
a set of 36 papers annotatedwith both schemes,
we were able to confirm that the two schemes
are indeedcomplementary[Liakataet al. (2010)].
CoreSCcategoriesprovidea greaterlevelofgran-
ularitywhenit comesto the content-relatedcate-
gorieswhereasAZ-II categoriescover aspectsof
the knowledgeclaimsthatpermeateacrossdiffer-
entCoreSCconcepts.
In [Guo et al. (2010)] we followed a simi-
lar methodology for annotating abstracts with
CoreSCsand an independentlyproducedannota-
tion schemefor abstractsections[Hirohataet al.(2008)]. We found a subsumptionrelation be-
tween the schemes, with CoreSCsproviding the
2
finergranularity.
To obtain the mapping between annotation
schemes,whichallows annotationschemesto be
definedin a widercontext, we ideallyrequirean-
notationsfromdifferentschemestobemadeavail-
able for the same set of papers. However, a first
interpretationoftherelationbetweenschemescan
be made by mappingbetweenannotationguide-
lines.
5 ThoughtsonusingCoreSCsfor
NegationandSpeculation
Current work of ours involves automating the
recognitionof CoreSCsand we plan to use them
to produceextractive summariesfor papers. We
arealsointheprocessofevaluatingtheusefulness
of CoreSCsfor Cancer Risk Assessment(CRA).
An important aspect of the latter is being able
to distinguish between positive and negative re-
sultsandassesstheconfidencein any conclusions
drawn. Thisnaturallyleadsus to the needfor ex-
ploring negation and speculation,both of which
are prominentin scientificpapers,as wellas how
thesetwo phenomenacorrelateto CoreSCs.
While it seems that negation can be identified
by means of certain linguisticpatterns [Morante
(2010)], different types of negation can appear
throughout the paper, some pertaining to back-
groundwork, problemsservingas the motivation
of the paper, others referringto intermediatere-
sults or conclusions. It is interestingto look at
thesedifferenttypesof negationin the context of
eachof thedifferentCoreSCs,thetypeof linguis-
ticpatternsusedtoexpressitandtheirdistribution
acrossCoreSCs. This can provide a more target-
tedapproachtonegation,whileatthesametimeit
canbeusedincombinationwithaCoreSCtoinfer
thetypeof knowledgeobtained(e.g. a positive or
negative result). We plan to use automaticmeth-
ods for recognisingnegationpatternsin CoreSCs
andrelatethemto specificCoreSCcategories.
There is a consensus that identifyingspecula-
tion is a harder task than identifying negation.
Part of the problemis that “speculative assertions
are to be identified on the basis of the judge-
mentsabouttheauthor’s intendedmeaning,rather
than on the presenceof certaindesignatedhedge
terms”[Medlockand Briscoe(2007);Lightet al.(2004)]. When annotatingpaperswith CoreSCs,
annotators are required to understand the paper
contentratherthanbasecategoryassignmentsen-
tirelyon linguisticpatterns. This is why we have
chosen experts as annotatorsfor the creation of
the CoreSC corpus. So both speculation and
CoreSCannotationappear to be higher level an-
notationtasksrequiringcomprehensionof the in-
tendedmeaning.Lookingat theannotationguide-
lines for hedges [Medlock and Briscoe (2007)],
it would seem that cases of hedge type 1 corre-
spond to to CoreSC Conclusion, hedge type
2 pertainsto Background, hedgetype 3 would
mainlybe cases of Motivation, hedge type 4
maps to Motivationor Hypothesis, hedge
type 5 maps to Goal and hedge type 6 maps to
Conclusion. Onecanlookatspeculationinthe
zones/windows identifiedby the previouslymen-
tioned CoreSCs. Indeed, two of the categories,
HypothesisandMotivationarespeculative
by definition.We intendto portthe issueof iden-
tifyingspeculationin our papersto that of identi-
fyingthecorrespondingCoreSCs.We alsoplanto
annotatethehedgeclassificationdataof[Medlock
and Briscoe(2007)]withCoreSCsto confirmthe
mappingbetweenthetwo schemes.
References
Y. Guo, A. Korhonen,M. Liakata,I Silins, L. LiSun,
and U. Stenius. Identifyingthe informationstruc-
tureof scientificabstracts:Aninvestigationof three
differentschemes. In Proceedingsof BioNLP2010.
To appear., Uppsala,Sweden,2010.
K. Hirohata, N. Okazaki, S. Ananiadou, and
M. Ishizuka. Identifyingsections in scientificab-
stractsusingconditionalrandomfields. In Proc. of
theIJCNLP2008, 2008.
M. Liakata and L.N. Soldatova. The art cor-
pus. Technical report, Aberystwyth University,
2009. URL http://www.aber.ac.uk/
en/cs/research/cb/projects/art/
art-corpus/.
M.Liakata,ClaireQ,andS.Soldatova. Semanticanno-
tationof papers: Interface & enrichmenttool (sapi-
ent). In Proceedingsof BioNLP-09, pages193–200,
Boulder, Colorado,2009.
M. Liakata,S. Teufel,A. Siddharthan,and C. Batche-
lor. Corporafortheconceptualisationandzoningof
scientificpapers. 2010.
M. Light, X.Y. Qiu, and P. Srinivasan. The language
of bioscience:Facts,speculationsandstatementsin
between. In Proceedings of BioLink 2004 Work-
shop on Linking Biological Literature, Ontologies
andDatabases:ToolsforUsers, Boston,2004.
J.Lin. Issearchingfulltextmoreeffectivethansearch-
ingabstracts? BMCBioinformatics, 10:46,2009.
T. McIntoshandJ.R.Curran.Challengesforautomati-
callyextractingmolecularinteractionsfromfull-text
articles.BMCBioinformatics, 10(311),2009.
3
B. Medlockand T. Briscoe. Weaklysupervisedlearn-
ing for hedge classificationin scientific literature.
In 45th Annual Meetingof the ACL, pages 23–30,
Prague,CzechRepublic,2007.
R. Morante. Descriptive analysis of negation cues
in biomedical texts. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth InternationalLanguage Resources and Evalu-
ation(LREC’10), pages1429–1436,Valletta,Malta,
2010.
S. Pyysalo, F. Ginter, J. Heimonen, J. Bjorne,
J. Boberg, J. Jarvinen,and T. Salakoski. Bioinfer:
a corpusfor informationextractionin the biomedi-
caldomain.BMCBioinformatics, 8(1),2007.
H. Shatkay, F. Pan, A. Rzhetsky, and W.J. Wilbur.
Multi-dimensionalclassificationof biomedicaltext:
Toward automated, practical provision of high-
utilitytext to diverseusers. Journalof Bioinformat-
ics, 24:18:2086–2093,2008.
L.N.Soldatova and R.D.King. An ontologyof scien-
tific experiments. Journalof the Royal SocietyIn-
terface, 3:795–803,2006.
L.N.Soldatova and M. Liakata. An ontologymethod-
ologyandcisp-theproposedcoreinformationabout
scientificpapers.TechnicalReportJISCProjectRe-
port, AberystwythUniversity, 2007. URL http:
//ie-repository.jisc.ac.uk/137/.
S. Teufel and A. Siddharthan. Whose idea was this,
andwhydoesitmatter?attributingsicentificworkto
citations.In Proceedingsof NAACL-HLT-07, 2007.
SimoneTeufel,AdvaithSiddharthan,andColinBatch-
elor. Towards discipline-independentargumenta-
tive zoning: Evidencefrom chemistryand compu-
tationallinguistics. In Proceedingsof EMNLP-09,
Singapore,2009.
V. Vincze,G.Szarvas,R.Farkas,G.Mra,andJ.Csirik.
Thebioscopecorpus:biomedicaltextsannotatedfor
uncertainty, negationand theirscopes. BMCBioin-
formatics, 9(Suppl11):S9,2008.
4

