Proceedings of the Fourth Linguistic Annotation Workshop, ACL 2010, pages 162–165,
Uppsala, Sweden, 15-16 July 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Anotaing Korean Demonstratives      Sun-He Le Welsly Collge elsley, USA 
slee6@wellesley.edu Jae-young Song Yonsei University Soul, Korea jysong@yonsei.ac.kr     Abstract 
This paer presnts preliminary work on a corus-bsd study of Kor demnstratives. Thrgh te evlpment of an aotion scem and th use of spke d write orpr, we aim to dtermin difernt func-tins of donstrativs ad to xamie their distributinal proerties. Our corpus tudy 
aopts imilr featurs of antain se in Btley and McEnery (201) d provides som liguisti hpothes on gramatical functions of Korean dmonstratives to be fur-ther xplred. 1 Introduction 
Korean demonstratives are known to have two difrnt functi: nphoric and deicti rfer-ence. Anaphori demonstratives refr to objcts, individuls, evnts, ituations, or propositons in the gien linguistic ontext. Deicti demtra-tives rfr to physial objects, individuals, or positons (or regions) in the given situational 
context. Deicti varitions commonly signal the speakr’s physil distance fr specifed items. Previous literature on Koran demonstrativs has focused on deicti functins in spoken Koren, but a comprehensive approach to their divrs linguisti functions is til laking. This tudy examines distinct usages of Korean demonstra-
tivs in a spoken nd  writen corpus through the annottion of rlevant linguisti features. Our annottion schem nd features ar xpctd to help clarify graaticl functions of Korean demonstrtives, s wel as other anphoric x-presions.      English demonstratives how a binary distinc-
tion that pends on physical distce; ther is a distinction betwen proximl forms (tis, these, this N, thes Ns) and distal fors (that, thos, that , those s). In contrst, demonstratives in 
languages like Korean and Japnese show a thre-way distinction: proximl forms, peaker-cntred distal forms, and speakerand her-entrd distl fors. For exampl, deicti de-monstrative irefrs to a proxial objet relativ to the spkr, ku refrs to a distnt jct hat is close to the hear, and ce rfers to a distant ob-
jet that is fr from both the speker nd the heare. Thus, distinct usage of ce and u is aso-citd with how the spekr aloctes the deicti entr and contextual space, i.e., the speaker-cntred spa vs. the speakrand t her–entrd sce. In contrst with deicti usage, prvious studis (Chang, 1980; Chang, 1984) 
asumed that anphoric demonstratives show only a two-y distintion betwen proximal forms ind distal forms ku. Howvr, it is til controversial s to whether the boundaries be-twen anaphora nd deixis are clear cut. With our nottion schem, we im to ptre the linguistic properties contributing to intrpta-
tions of demonstrativs in Korean. In particulr, we ai to termine whether difernt registers or gnres contribute to difrent functions of d-monstratives by comparing thir sage in a spo-ken corpus and a writen corpus.   In considertion of a future comparative anal-ysi with English demonstrativs, we h de-
signed our annotaion schee by adopting Botly and McEnery’s (2001) paradigmatic set of dis-tinctive fatures for English deonstratives. Howr, th detailed annotation features h been revised acording to lnguag specifc fea-turs of Korn.  2 Corpus Study 
For data extraction, we used two Sejong taged cpor including a 20,343 ojeol spoken corpus and 21,023 eojol writen corpus.1 Each corpus is                                                  
1 The
trm eojl refrs to aunit set of by spaces and cor-responds t awrd unit in Eglish. 
162
composed of four conversations/texts with ap-proximatly 5000 ejl. The subcorpora of the spoken corpus ar vryday conversations with-out asigned topics and those of the writen cor-pus re thre newspaper articles and part f a novl.    Compared to English, Korean demonstratives 
include mor complex gramtical categoris with orphologial rlations. The demonstrative forms i, ku, and ce ombine with other words or phees nd form cplx rds including nominals (.g., i-kes: this+thing ‘this’), adverbs (e.g., ce-lhkey: that+way ‘that way’), djctivs (.g., ku-lhata: itis ‘is o’) nd other lexial 
categories. Thus, it is dificult to detrmine if they al belong to the same ategory of deon-strtives in Korean. In this tudy, demonstratives are rstricted to words that contain i, ku, nd c mintaining a distinct refrentilfunction of pointing. The selcted dmonstratives include adnouns ( iN ‘this N’,  ku N ‘tht N’, ce ‘that 
N’), pronouns (i-es/i-ke ‘this’, ku-kes/ ku-k ‘it’, ce-ks/cek ‘that’, i-tul ‘thes’, -tul ‘they’ ce-tul), and locative pronouns ( yeki ‘her’, ki ‘there’, ceki ‘ovr there’). Although thos forms hav difrnt lexical catgories, trong siilari-ties xist within the sme phological familes, which e il refr to as itype, ku type, nd c 
type demonstrativs. Our annotation work aims to extract a generalization of the fundaentl usag of the thr difernt ypes and to us that eneralization for dvloping further esarch on various morphological arints containing i, ku, nd ce. 
2.1 The
Anotation Scheme In order to mark refrential functions of Korean demonstratives, w first dopt Haliday and H-san’s (1976) clasifcation of the difernt refr-ence functions of demonstratives: xophoric vs. ndophoric usage. We further divide xophora into deixis nd background. Whil th former 
refrs to a physil object or an individual (or location) in the situational ontext, the later e-fers to certain shared information betwn the speaker and the hear.      (1)   Refrence 
 situational (exophoric)  textual (endophoric)   deicti  background  anphoric atphoric     (shred nwlege)    
Six distinct features include “Lexical Category of a Demonstrtiv”, “Endophority”, “Exopho-ricty”, “Syntacti Category of an Antecdent”, “Phoric Tpe”, and “Smantic Function of a Antedent. The first five fatures are adopted from five features in Botly nd McEnery’s (2001) annotion work on English demonstra-
tives.2 The last feature (semantic function) hs ben added for futur work nnotating semantic informtion that faciltaes anphor rsolution process.   Lxical categories of Korean demonstratives in this tudy includ four parts of speech: dnoun, pronoun, locative pronoun (functioning also as 
an adverb), nd xclamtory expresions. While the first hre categories how rfrntial func-tions, the xlmtory xpresions do not have refrence. Instead, the ar usd as expresions convying the speaker’s emotion or sta, .g., embarasment, confusion, hedging.
 We do not, howevr, xclude the posibilty of linguistic connectiity betwn demonstrative and exla-matory forms. For instanc, the distl demonstr-tive f ce tnds to be used as a hedging ex-prsion in Korean. Our study includes exclam-tory usage as an annotation feature.  
Endophoricty refrs to two difernt func-tions: anaphori vs. catphoric. Exophoricty re-fers to context based vs. deixis. Acording to Haliday and Hsn’s clasifcation in (1), de-monstrtives with refrentil function show two ajor usags: endophoric and exophoric. The first ype tks its antedent within the givn 
text; the later, within the given situation. Dis-tinction betn an anaphor and a catphor de-pends the positon of the ntecdent. When a endophor folows its antcdent, it is a aphor; the other case is a ctphor. Demonstrtives may have difernt types of antecdents yntactily. The corsponding vlues include nominals (in-
cluding N or NP), clausals (including V, A, VP,                                                  2 As one of the rviewrs pointed out, our study has ome limitais a it only rfers t tw previs ties, Haliday and Hsan (1976) ad Botley and McEnery (201). Al-though we re awre f th ther fudamtal work includ-
in demonstrtivs in abroadr ange of refrential expres-sios uch as Gundel t l. (193), Princ (1981), Nisim t al. (204), etc., w chose to fcus o Korean demonstra-tives becaus their exact gramatial functios have ot bn omprensivly studie in existig literatur. In adi-tio, devloig abroaer clasifcation sytm for efren-tial xprsins in Krn is chlegi task fr both 
theoretical d empircal perspetivs; linguistic anlyse of Kran ominal xresions must deal with otroversial isues uch s definitns withot rticles, zer elmnts fnctionig as aphors, unsytemati morpholgical ark-ig f plurlity nd genrict, tc.  
163
AP, etc.), and sentntial elments (S or Ss for mor than two sntces).3 The feature semanti function of an atec-dent includes valus of nominal entites, vnts, and propositons. This feature wil be xpanded into specifed values uch s vnt, proces, ste, and irumstncs in our future study. Phoric 
type has been adopted from Botly and McEnery (2001) and rfers to two distinct reltions: refr-ence substiution. Acording to Haliday nd Hasn, substiution is a relation betwen linguis-tic forms, whereas refrnc is a rlation betwen meanings. T vlus of phoric type lso include non-phoric such as exophora whose antecdents 
exist outside the txt.   The annotation features and values we use are summrized in Tbl 1.  Feature Value1 Value2 Value 3 Value4 Lexical 
Catgory (L) AN (adnoun) PR (ronun) LPR (ocative prnun) EX (xcla-mation) Endophoric-ty (O) A (anphor) C (catphor)     Exophoricty (X) T (situation-al) D (deicti)    
Syntacti Fution (F) NO (nominals) CL (clausal) S (senttial)   Semantic Fuctio (M) N (enties) E (evnt) P (prosi-tins)  Phoric Type 
(H) R (refrence) U (Substiu-tion) K (no-phoric) Table 1 Anotaion Features and Posible Values  The inital results of inter-annotator agrement betwen two trained annotors re promisng.  Cohen’s Kappa is 0.76 for the averag agrement of six high levl categies nd it incrs fol-
lowing a discusion period (K = 0.83, K=2)4. 3 Results We identifed 1,235 demonstratives in our pilot study. Th distributions of demonstratives wer significantly difernt betwen the spokn and 
                                                 3 Although te syntacti category of an atecdent can be diferntiatd i  more sphisticted wy usig phrsal catgories uch as NP, VP, AdvP, tc. (as el as lexicl teris), tis wil render the anotion procs narly imposible unles on us a corpus with sytati aot-tin, such as trbaks. Thus, we se simplifed syntcti 
iformation such s nominal, clausal, nd senttial. 4 The agrement rate was callated for each six hig levl catgoris partly nd then vrg. T syntacti func-tion has the lowest agremt rate ven after the dissio (K=0.76). Tis i du to cplx prortis of Korean de-monstratives with nclear boundaries betwen exclmtory expresions and otr lxical ctgoris. 
the writen corpora. Table 2 shows the raw fre-quencis in the spoken nd the writen corpora for each combination of feature and value out-lind in Table 1. The raw frquncies re sup-plemnted with t log likelihood in ordr to show the significance for frquency difernces in the two corpor in Table 2. Each demonstra-
tive is followed by a two-charter co sep-ratd by underscore. The first charater dnots the feature and the scond the vlu. For exam-pl, the first item kulen ‘that (kind of)’ whose lexical category (L) is adnoun (AN) mostly ap-pered in the spoken corpus and not in the writ-ten corpus.
5  Feature        S    W     L klen_LAN 183 14 17. ulHR 7  .3 klen_OA 163 14 152.4 
u(s)L_PR   20 38 8. ke(s)H 187  12.5 u_LEX 4 9 09.6 iOA  6 105 14. kue(s)_OA 172 38 97.0 lnFN 69 2 82.4 ike(s)_HK 8 3 75. 
i(s)XD 63 2 4.3 Table 2 Frequency of Demonstrative Features  Whereas 931 demonstratives appeard in the spoken corpus, only 304 pperd in the writn corpus. The distributions of thre difernt ypes of demonstratives are listed in Table 3. 
 Types Total Frequency Writen Spoken Frq. % Freq. % i 398 176 56 2 4 ku 7 28 17 645 83 ce 64 0 0  10 Total 1235 34 25 931 75 
able 3 Distribution f Thre Demonstrative Types  The spoken corpus and the writen corpus show difernt prfernces for i, ku, and  types.   Writen: i (58%) > ku (42%) > ce (0%) Spok: ku (69)  i()   (7) 
 Whereas ku demonstratives are prefred to cr-responding idetrtis in the spokn rpus, i demonstrativs are prefred in t writen cor                                                
5 In
Table 2, the log likelihod scores how that he usage of kule is ignifcantly difrent i th spken d t writn corps. The log-likelihod scores in Tabl 2 are signifcat at 9 prcnt cnfidnce lvl with 1 degre of redom if they are greatr tha 6.. W only sow aprtial frquency list r du to te space limitais.  
164
pus. This fact is asociated with the linguistic function of ku tht reprsnts a speaker’s desire to anchor interpersonal involvmnt with th here by activly invitng the are’s voluntary understnding of the target refrnt. In contrst, idemonstratives imply that the speaker (writer) intends to incorporate the are (rdr) ithin 
the proximal cognitiv distnc. In terms of an-notation fetures, our findings are sumarized s follows.  Lexical category: In both the writen and spokn orpor, adnominal demonstrativs re more frequently used than pronouns or locativ pronouns. Demonstrative forms used as intesif-
ers, hedges, or personal habitual nois hav been markd as xclamtives. Annottors e found that it is often dificult to clearly distinguish them from adnominal demonstrtives.   Endophoricty: Our writen corpus does not include any atphors, hras the spoken cor-pus shows 61 cse (cf. 523 naphors). This fat 
sems to be rlatd to the speaker’s discourse strategy of intending to cal the discourse partic-pants’ atention by pling an endophoric el-ment befor its antecdent.  Exophicty: Exophoric usage of demonstr-atives in the writen corpus is vry liited. Only 17 case er found (6 deixis s. 11 context-
based). In the spoken corpus, exophori usags occur more frequently aross thre types of de-monstrativs. The deicti usag dominates th context-based usage (151 deixis vs. 79 contxt-basd). As noted in previous literature, e de-monstratives maily appar in dicti contxt, where its antecdent is visble or exist in the 
givn situation. Ther sems to be a constraint of deicti usage of c involving physil existence or visbilty (r ognitie awrenes) of an ntity in additon to distanc. This hypothesi neds to be further investigted with additional data.  Syntactic and Smantic Function: Al thre types of i, ku, and ce deonstratives refr to no-
minal enties s thir antecdents. Although i and ku demonstratives r also used to refr to clsals and senttial lemnts, only a fw ex-amples of c rplce clausal or sentntial l-nts. Another notabl point is that iand ku de-monstrativs rfer to clausal or senttial l-ents (coresponding to evnts  propositons) 
mor frequently than nominal entites in both spoken and writen corpora. 59% of th antec-dents of i demonstratives (56% for ku type) in the writen corpus r clausals or sentntial el-ments, hereas 53% of the ntecdents of itype (69% for ku type) are in the spokn corpus. This 
result neds to be tsted on a lrger corpus in our futr study.  Phoric Type: In our annotated corpus, we only found rfrntial exmpls, not substiu-tional case. Exophoric aples are marked as non-phoric. In the writen corpus, rfrntil de-monstratives are predominant (285 case) and a 
sal number of non-phoric ase r observed (18 cse). In the spoken orpus, rferntial -monstratives are mor frquent (590 cas), whe-reas non-phoric ase have been more observd than ithe writen corpus (198 case).  3 Conclusion 
In this paper we presnted a corpus-based study on Korean demonstrativs. Six annotaion fea-tures wr used to rk complex linguistic func-tions of demonstratives. Using spoken and writ-ten corpora, we compared difernt usges of Korean demonstratives and showd that their usgs re difernt dpeding on the registers of 
spoken and writn Korean.    In spite of the deicti functions of demonstra-tives highlightd in previous resarch, our study indicates that endophoric ag is more predo-minant. This hypothesi, as wel as othrs in this study, wil be testd with  large corpus in our future ork. W also plan to incrporate more 
sophisticated exploition on semantic types of antecdents. This informatiwil be useful for rsolving the meaning of naphoric demonstra-ties. Refrences 
Botley, Simon ad Tony McEnery. 201. Demonstra-tivs i Eglish. Jurnal of English Linguistics, 29(1): 7-3. Chang, Kyung-He. 1980. Semantic Analysi of De-mostrative i, ku, ce. Ehakyku,16(2):167-0184. Chang, Seok-Jin 1984. Cisw Cong. Hangul, 6: 15-149. 
Gundel, Jaenet, Nancy Hedberg, and Ron Zachars-ki. 193. Cogitve Staus and the Frm of Re-fering Expresions in Discours. Languag, 69(2):74-307. Haliday, M.A.K. and Ruqaiy Hasn. 1976. Cohe-sion i English. London: Longm. Min, Kyug o. 208. A Study  Refrence Items in 
orean. Ph.D. isertaion. Yonsi Uivrsity. Poesi, Msimo. 204. The MATE/GNOME Schem fr Anaphoric Anotaion, Revisted. In Prodings of SIGDIL. Bst. Prince, Ele. 1981. Toward a Taxonmy of Given-Nw Informatin. Ricl Prgatics: 23-25. Acadeic Pres. New York. 
165

