Proceedings of the NAACL HLT Workshop on Extracting and Using Constructions in Computational Linguistics, pages 9–16,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
Towards an Invetory of English Verb Agument Constructions 
 
Matthew Brook O’Donnel Nick Ellis 
Univrsity of Michiga Universty of Michgan 
500 E. Washington St. 500 E. Washington St.
Ann Arbr, MI 4810, USA Ann Arbr, MI 4810, USA 
mbod@umich.eduncellis@umich.edu
Abstract 
This paper outlines and pilots our approach to-
wardevlopnginvetoryfverb-argument 
constructions based upon English form, function,
and usage. We search a tagged and dependency-
parsed BNC(a 100-milion word corpus f Eng-
lish) for Verb-Argumet Costuin(VACs) in-
cluding those previously identfied n the pattern 
grammar resulting from the COBUILD project. 
This geneaes (1) alisofverb types thaoccupy 
each construction.We next tally he frequency o-
files of th vb to pduce (2) a frequny 
ranked type-tokn distribtion for ths vrbs, ad
we dtrmi tegr twhih tiZipf. 
Sincesomverbs afihful to oneconstructon 
whil oth mor pomiscuos, we nex o-
duce (3)a contingency-weightedlitreflecting 
their statistical sociation. T test wthr achof
 meure isa step towar incresin te 
learnbility of VACs as categories, folg prin-
ciples of associative learning, we exami 20 vbs 
from each distrbution. Her we plore whther
thereisan increase inthe snticcohesion of he 
verbs occupying each construction using antic 
similarity easures. From inspetio, thisemsto
be so. We ardeveloping eaures of this using 
network easures of clustering inth vrb-space 
defined by ordNet and Roget’s Thesaurus. 
1 Construction
grammar and Usage 
Constructions are form-meaning mappings, 
conventionalized in the speech community, and 
entrenched as language knowledge in the learner’s 
mind. They are the symbolic units of language re-
latingthe defing proerties oftheir orphlogi-
cal, lexical, and syntactic formwith particular se-
mantic, pragmatic, and discourse functions 
(Goldberg, 2006). Construction Grammar agues 
that all grammatical phenomena cn be undestood 
as learned pairings of form(frommorphemes, 
words, ioms, tartily exialy filed an fuly 
general phrasal patterns) and their associated se-
manticordiscourse functions: “the network of 
constructions captures our grammatical knowledge 
in to, i.e. It’s constructions all the ay down” 
(Goldberg, 2006, p. 18). Such beliefs, increasingly 
influential in the study ofchild language acquisi-
tion, have turned upide wnenerativassmp-
s ofinnate langagacquisitio devices, the 
continuity hypothesis, and top-down, rule-
governed, processing, bringing back data-driven, 
emergent accounts of linguistic systematicities.  
Frequency, learning, and lnguage cometo-
gether in usage-based approaches whihold ha 
we larn lguistc construcions wle engi in
communication. The last 50 years of psycholn-
guistic research provides the evidence usage-
based acquisition in ts demonstrations that la
guage processing s exquisitely sensitve o usage 
frequency at all evelof language representation 
om phonology,through exis and syntax, to sen-
tence processing (Ellis, 2002). Language knowl-
edge involves statistical knowledge, so humans 
learn more easily and process more fluently hig 
frequency forms and ‘regular’patterns which are 
exemplified by any types and which have few 
competitors. Psycholinguistic perspectives thus 
hold that language learning is the associative learn-
ing ofrepresentations that reflect the probabilities 
of occurrence of form-function mappings. Fre-
quency is a key determinant of acquisition because 
‘rules’ of language, at all levels of analysis from 
phonology, through syntax, to discourse, are struc-
tural regularities which emerge from learners’ life-
time ncosciouanalysis o the distributional 
characteristics of the language input.  
If constructions as form-function mappings are 
the units oflanguage, then language acquisition 
involvesindcin these associations from experi-
ence of language usage. Constructionist accounts 
of language acquisition thus involve the distribu-
tional analysis ofthe language stream an par-
allel analysis of contingent perceptuo-motorctiv-
9
ity, with abstract constructions being learned as
categories from the conspiracy of concrete exem-
plars of usage following statical learning mecha-
nisms (Bod, Hay, & Jannedy, 2003; Bybee & 
Hoper, 201; Elis,20) reat iput and
learner cognitio. Pychological analyses ofthe 
in ofstructions asfrm-mening pairs 
frmedby the literature  the associative learn-
ing cue-outcomcotingencies where thusal 
determinants include: (1) inputfrequency (type-
token frequency, Zipfiandistribution, recency), (2) 
form (salience and perception), (3) function (proto-
typicality ofmeaning, importance ofrm for mes-
sage comprehension, redunacy), and (4) itrac-
tions between these (cotingency f-function 
mapping) (Ellis & Cadierno, 2009).
2 Determinants
of construction learnig 
In natural language, Zipf’s law (Zipf, 1935) de-
scribes how a handful of the highest frequency 
words accountfor the most linguistic tokens. 
Zipf’s law states hat frequency of words de-
creases as a power function of their rank in the fr
quency table. Ifp
f
 is the proportion of words whose 
frequency rank in a given language sample is f, 
then p
f
 ~ f 
-b, with b≈ 1. Zipfshowed this scaling 
relation holds across a wide variety of language 
samples. Subsequent research provides suport f 
this law asa linguistic niversal: many language
events (e.g., frequencies of phoneme and letter 
strings, of words, of grammatical constructs, of 
formulaic phrases, etc.) across scales of analysis 
follow this law (Solé, Murtra, Valverde, & Steels, 
2005). 
Goldberg, Casenhir & Sethuraman (2004) 
demonstrated that n samples of child anguage 
acquisition, for a variety verb-argument con-
structions (VACs), there is a strong tendency for 
one single verb o occur wth very high frequency 
in comparison tother verbs ued, a profile which 
closely irrors that of the mothers’ speech to these 
children. Goldberg et al. (2004) show that Zipf’s 
law applies within VACs too, and theyargue that 
thisromotesacquisition: kensfone particular 
verb account for the lion’s share of instances of 
each particular argument frame; this pathbreaking 
verb also is the one with he prototypical meaning 
from which the construction isderived(see also 
Ninio, 19). 
Ellis and Ferreira-Junior (2009) investiga ef-
fectupon naturalistc second language acquisition 
of type/token diributions in three Elh vrb-
argument constructions. They show that VAC ve 
type/token distribution inthe input isZipfian and
that learnersfirst acqire mosfreqent, proto-
tyical an geric exemlar. (e.g. put in VOL 
[verb-object-locative], give i VO [verb-object-
object], etc.). Acquisition is affected by the fre-
quency distribution of exemplars within each is-
land ofthe construction, by their prototypicality, 
and, using a variety of psychological (Shanks, 
1995) a crpu lgitc asoan metrcs 
(Gries & Stefanowitsch, 2004), by their contin-
gency of form-function mapping. This fudamental 
claim that Zipfian distributional properties of la
guage usage helps to make language learnable has 
thus begn tobe explored for these three VACs, at 
least. It remains an important research agenda to 
explore its generality acros a wide range of con-
structions (i.e. the contructicon).
The primary motivaton of construction gram-
mar is tha we must brng together linguistc form, 
learner cognitio, andusage. Animportant conse-
quence is that constructions cannot be defined 
purely on he basis of lnguistc form, or sematics, 
or frequncy of usage alone. ll three factors are 
necessary in their operationalizaton and measure-
ment. Our reserch ms to do this. We hope to 
describe the verbal grammar of English, to analyze 
the way VACs mapform and meang, ad opro-
vide an inventory of the verbs that exemplify con-
structons and their frequency. This last step is 
necessary because he type-token frequencydistri-
bution of their verbs determines VAC acquisition 
as abstract schematic constructions, an because 
usage frequency detnes their entrenchment 
and processing. 
This paper describes and pilots our approach. 
We focus njust wo constructions fr ilustraion
here (V across n, and V Obj bj) although our 
procedures are pricipled, generic and applicable 
to all VACs. We search a tagged and ependcy-
parsed British NationalCorpus (a 100-milion 
word corpus f Englsh) for VACs incluig those 
previously identified in the COBUILD patern 
grammar project. This generates (1) a list f verb 
types that occupy each construction. We extally
the frequency rfiles of these verbs to produce (2) 
a frequency ranked type-token distribution for 
these verbs, and we etermine thegree to which 
10
this Zipfian. Since some verbs are faithful to one 
construction while others are ore promiscuous, 
we next produce (3) a contingency-weighted list 
whichflcts heir staitcl asocition.  
3 Method

As astring poit, we consider sveral of the 
majorheores and daasets of onstuction gram-
r such FrmeNe (Fillmore, Johnson, & 
Petuck, 2003). However, because our research 
aims to empirically determine the semantic asso-
ciations of particular linguistic forms, it is impor-
tant that such forms are initially defined by ot-
tom-up means that semantics-free. There is no 
one in corpus linguistics who ‘trusts the ext’ more 
than Sinclair (2004). Therefore e chose the Pat-
ternGramar (Francis et al. 1996) definto of 
Verb constructions tha rose ut of hs Cobuild
project.
 
3.1 Construction
inventory: COBUILD Verb 
Patterns 
 
The form-based patterns described in the CO-
BUILD Verb Paterns volume (Francis et al. 1996) 
take thform fword classand lexis combina-
tions, uch asVacross n, V inton and V n n. For 
each of these patterns the resource provides infor-
mation as to he structural configurations and func-
tional/mening groups found round hese paterns 
through detailed conrdance alysis ofthe Bank 
of English corpus during the construction of the 
COBUILD dictionary. For instance, the fllowing 
is provided for the Vacross n ptrn(Francis, et 
al., 1996, p. 150): 
 
The verb is followed by a prepositonal phrase 
whichonto acrs ndoun grp.
 
This patern has one structure: 
* Verb wih Adjunct.
   I cut acros the field 
 
Further exampl sentnces ar provided drawn 
from he corpus and a list of verbs found in the 
pattern and that are semantcally typical are given. 
For his paern these are: brush, cut, fall, ficker, 
flit plane, skim, sweep. No indication is given as to 
how frequent each of these types are or how com-
prehensive the list s. Further structural (syntacti-
cal) characteristics of the pattern are sometimes 
provided, such as the fact that for V across n the 
prepositional phrase is an adjunctand that tverb 
is never passive.
For some construction paterns with a gener-
ally fixed order it may be sufficient just to specify 
combinations of word and part-ofspeech se-
quences. For example, a main verb followed by 
across within 1to 3words (to alw for adverbial 
lements), flloedby a nur pronouwithina 
few words. To such constraints a number excep-
tions ofwhat sould t occur within the specified 
spans must be added. The variation and potential
complexity of English noun phrases presents chal-
lenges for this approach. On the other hand a 
multi-level constituent arse tree provides more 
than needed. A depcy arse withrd-to
wordelatiosiwel suitedforthe ask. 
 
3.2 Corpus: BNC XML Parsed 
 
The analysis of verb type-token distribution inthe 
kinds of construction paterns described in the pre-
vious section should deally be carried out using a 
range of corpora in the magnitude of the tens or 
hundreds of milions of words as the original work 
is derived from the Bank ofEnglish (a groing
monitorcorpus of over 400 milion ords). These 
corpora should, at the least, be part-ofspeech 
tagged tosearchfor the pattern asspecified. Fur-
ther some kind artial arsingand chnking is
necessary to apply the structural constraints (see 
Masn & Hunso, 2004 for exploratory 
methodology). We chose to use the 100 million 
word Britsh Natial Corpus (BNC) onacunt of 
itssize, the breadthofgenres itcontains and con-
sistent lemmatizaton and part-ofspeech tgging. 
Andersnt al.(2008) parsed th XML version of 
the BNCuingthe RASP parser (Briscoe, Carroll, 
& Watson, 2006). is a statistical feature-
based parser that produces  probabilistcally or-
dered set of parse trees for a given sentence and 
additionally a set of grammatical relations (GRs) 
that capture “those aspects ofpredicate-argument 
structure that the system is able to recover and is 
the most table and gramar indepent repre-
sentatio available” (Briscoe, et al., 2006, p. 79). 
The GRs are organized into a hierarchy of depend-
ency relations, including distinctions between 
modifiers and rguments and within arguments 
between subject (sub) and complements (comp).  
Figur 1 shows theGRs ssigned by RASP for the 
11
sentence: The kitchen light skids across the lawn 
(BNCA0U). The main verb skids has wo argu-
ments, asubjet (ncsubj) and indirect object (iobj), 
and the preposition one argument (dobj). 
 
Figure 1.Example ofRASP GRs 
 
The RASP GR hierarchy does not include catego-
ries such as prepositional complement or adjunct. 
Figure 2 shows the Rs for anther sentence con-
tainingacross whic i nt an example of th V 
across n patrn. Alteraly migt aac
across directly o he main verb threw, but at least 
from examining BNC examples containing across, 
it appears RASP tends tofavor local attachments 
(also for towars in this case).  
 
 
Figure 2.Example ofRASP GRs 
 
The GRs from have been incorporated into 
the XML for each BNC sentence thereby preserv-
ing token, part-ofspeech and lemma informa-
tion in the corpus.  
 
3.3 Searching
construction patterns 
 
Our search lgorithm works afolows: 
 
1. Process ach sentenc in turn testing 
against an XPath expression to identify 
components in construction patterns, e.g. 
.//w[@lem="across"][@pos="PREP"]/
preceding-sibling::w[position()<3]
[@pos="VERB"][1] finds a verb followed by 
across within 2 words. 
2. Creat list of thegrammatical rtions 
whrhsverbfuncis hed. 
i. Thi finds t ncsubj aniobj rela-
tions for th example setec.  
ii. Al fid GRs involig othrmponents 
of pattern (e.g.across).
3. Check hese GRs against aconstraint list, 
e.g. make sure that 
i. only one relation where the dependent 
word comes after th verb (xcluding 
verbs with botdobjandiobjor obj2)
ii. the pnt of th scond cmponent 
matchs a specific part-ofspeech (e.g.
across a head an nu as deent). 
4. For thing sentencs rcord verb 
lemma. 
 
Here we rpot njust wo construction paterns: 1.
V across n ad 2. V n o V Obj (wh n
includes bth s and pros). We ave also 
run a range ofsimilar VPrep n patterns from CO-
BUILD, such as V into n, V after n, V as n. We
have stilto carry out a systematic precision-recall 
analysis, but ad hoc examination suggests that the 
strict constraints using the dependency relations 
provides a reasonable precision and the size of the 
corpus results in a large enough nmber of tokens 
to carry out distributional analysis (see Table 1). 
 
Constrction Types Tokens TTR 
V across n799488916.34
Obj j 663 9183 7.22 
 
Table 1.Type-Token data for Vacross n and V Objj 
constructions 
3.4  Identifying the meaning of verb types occu-
pying the constructions 
We onsider sevral ways ofanlyzig the 
semantics th resulting verb distributions. It ism-
portant thatthe smantic mesures we employ are 
defined in a way thats free of linguistic distribu-
tional information, otherwise ould be uilding 
in circularity. Thereformethods such as LSA are 
notapplicable here. Istead, our research utilzes 
two distribution-free semantic databases: (1) Ro-
get’s thesaurus, a classic lexical resource of long-
standing proven utilty, based on Roget’s guided 
introspections, as implemented inthe Open o-
get’s Project (Kennedy, 2009). This provides vari-
ous algorithms for measuring the semantic similar-
ity between terms and between sentences. (2) 
WordNet, asd upon sycholinguistic theory and 
in evelopment ince 1985 (Miller, 2009). Word-
tclse wors it ahiercial network. At
the to level, the hierarchy for verbs is organized 
in15base types (such as mov1 exprsig trans-
lational movement ande2 momet whout 
displacement, communicate, etc.) which  spli
into er 1,50 verb synnym sets or synsets. 
12
Verbs are linkd ithe irachy acording torela-
tionuchasypernm(to move is a hypernym 
of to wal), and troponym, the term used for hypo-
nymic relations in the verb componentof WordNet 
(to lisp is a tropny of to talk). There are various 
algorithms to determine the semantic similarity 
between synsets in WordNet whihonside h 
distance between the conceptual categriesof
word, as welascosiderig te irachical 
structure of the WordNet (Pedersen et al. 2004). 
3.5 Determinig
the contingecy betwn 
construction form and fution 
Some verbs are losely tied to a particular con-
struction (for example, give is highly indtive of 
the ditransitive construction, wereas leave, l-
ough it can form a ditransitive, is more ften as-
sociated with other constructions such as the sim-
ple transive or intransitive). The more reliable the 
contingency between a cue and an outcome, the 
more radily n associton between them can be 
learned(Shanks, 1995), so constructions with 
 faithful verb members a mor trnsparent 
and thus should be more readily acquired. Ellis and 
Fereia-Junior (2009) use ΔP and collostructional 
analysis easures (Stefanowitsch & Gries, 2003) 
to show effects ofrm-function contingency upon 
L2 VAC acquisition. Others use conditonal prob-
abilities to investigate contingency effects in VAC 
acquisition. This is still an active area of inquiry, 
and more research required before we know 
which staitcl measure of form-function con-
tingencyare ore predictive f acquisition and 
processing. Meanwhile, the simplestusable meas-
ure is one of faithfulness – the proprtion of tokens 
of total verb usage as a whole that appear in this 
particular construction. For ilustration, the faih-
fulness of give tohe dtranstve is aproximately 
0.40; that for lea is 0.01.  
4 Results

4.1 Evaluating
the verb distribution 
 
Forthe V across n patern th procedur otlined 
in the previous sectio results in the fllowing list:
 
come 483    
walk203...
cut 199 veer 4   
run175whirl...
spread 146 slice 4 discharge 1 
...  clamber navigate
... scythe  
   scroll1
Figure 3.Vrb type distribution for Vacross n 
At first glance this ditrbution des aper tobe 
Zipfian,exhibing he characteristic long-tailed
distribution in a plot of rank against frequency. 
Dorogvste & Mendes(2003, pp. 22-223) out-
line the commonly used methods for measuring 
power-law distributions: 1. a simple log-log plot 
(rank/frequency), 2. log-log plot of cumulative 
probability against frequency and 3. the use of 
logarithmic binngover the distribution fr a log-
 pt as 2. Lear regression canbe applied to 
the resultingplots and esofit (R
2
) and the 
slope (γ) recorded. 
Figur 3 shows such a plot for verb type fre-
quency of the V across n construcion pae ex-
tracted from the parsed BNC XML corpus flow-
ing the irdlottingmethd. Verb types are 
grouped into 20 larithmic bins acording their 
frequency (x-axis) against the logarithm ofthe cu-
mulative probability of  verb ocurring wt o
above this frequency (y-axis). Each point repre-
sents one bin and a verb from each group is ran-
13
domly selected to label the point with s token fre-
quency in parenthes. For example, the type look 
occurs 102 times in the V across n pattern and is 
placed into he 15
th
 b with teys go, lie and 
lean. Points towards the lower right ofthe plot in-
dicate high-frequency low-type groupings an 
those towards the top left frequency high-type 
groupings, that is the fator lon-tail of the distri-
bution. Looking at verbs given as examples of 
the pattern inCOBUILD vlume wfin all but 
plane rersented in our corpus search Vacross n: 
brush (12 tokens, group 9), cut (199 tokens, group 
18), fall (57, g14), flicker (21, g0), flit (15, g9) 
plane (0), skim (9, g8)sweep (34, g12).  
Figure 4.Vrb type distribution for VObj  
 
 4 show te plot for verb type frequency of 
the ditransitive Obj construction pattern ex-
tracted an binned inthe same way. Both distribu-
tionscane fittedith a traight regression line 
(R
2
=0.993). Thus we conclude that the type-token 
frequency distributions for these constructions are 
Zipfian. (In future e wil ivestigae th oter 
plot and fiting methods to ensure we have not
smoothed the data too much throu binng.) In-
spection of the construction verb types, from most 
frequent down, also suggests tha, as i prio re-
search (Ellis & Fereia-Junior, 2009; Goldberg et 
al., 2004; Ninio, 1999), the most frequent items are 
prototypical of the construction and moregeneric 
in their action sematics. 
 
4.2 Evaluating
the roles of frequency distribu-
tion and faithfulness in semantic cohesion 
 
The second step in evaluating the verb distribu-
tions from the construction patterns isto compare a 
smallsetof types selected on the basis of flat 
type distributio, the (Zipfian) token frqucy
distribution and a distributithat represents the 
egree to which verb is attracted tothe particular 
construction. First e select the top 200 types from 
the two VACs, ordered bytoken frequency. Then
we sample20 vers frm thisltarndom. is 
isthe ‘typeslist’. Next we take thtop 20typesas
‘tokens Finally, calculate the token-
ized faithulns core for each tye by diviing 
the verb’s freqency inthe construction its
overall frequency in the wholBNC. For example, 
spread ocurs 146 tmes i the V across n pater 
and 5503 times in total. So its faithfulness i
146/5503*100 = 2.65%, i.e. 1 in38, of the n-
stances of spread ocur asspread across n. Th 
tokenized faithlnes core for spread is ten
simply (146/5503) * 146 = 3.87, which tempers the 
tendcy for low frequency types such asscud, 
skiter anemblazon t rise th t of the list 
and is our initial attempt to combine the effects of 
token frequency and costruction cotingency. We 
reorder the 200 types by this figure and takth
top twty for the ‘faithfulness list’. Tables 2 and 3 
contain these lis fr thewo cstrucions. An 
intuitive reading fthese lists sugests that e to-
kens list captures the most general and prototypical 
senses (walk, move ec. fr Vacross n ad give, 
make, tlofr f V Obj), while t list or-
dered by tokenized faith higligts some quite 
construction spi (and low frquency) items, 
such as scud, flit and flicker for V across n. 
 The final component is to quantify the seman-
tic coherence or ‘clumpiness’ of the verbs ex-
tracted inthe previous tep. Fr this we use 
WordNetand Roget’.Pedersn et al. (2004) out-
line six measures intheir Perl WordNet::Similarity 
package, three (path, lch a wup) based on the 
path length between concepts in ordNet Synsets 
and three (res, jcnlin) that incorporate a  
measure caled ‘information content’ relatd to 
concept specificity. Tables 4 and 5 show t simi-
14
larity scores that result from taking the 20 types in 
each of the lists in Tables 2 and 3 and generating a 
20 by 20 distance matrix. 
 
types (sample) tokens faithfulness 
1 scuttle comespread 
2ridwal scud
3 paddl cutsprawl 
4communicate run cut 
5 rise spreadwalk
6staremove come 
7 drift lookstride
8stridego lean 
9 face lieflit
10dart lean stretch 
11 flee stretchrun
12skidfall scatter 
13 print getskier
14shoutpass flicker 
15 use reachslant
16stamptravel scuttle 
17 look flystumbl
18splashstride sling 
19 conduct scatterskid
20scudsweep flash 
Table 2.Top 20 types for Vacross n ore by tpes, 
tokns ad construction tokenized faithfulness 
 
types (sample) tokens faithfulness 
1  eat givegive 
2 attendmae call
3  fel calloffer 
4 reciv tell make
5  missdosend 
6 choe offer tell
7  afctsendhand 
8 cm show show
9  meanfindearn 
10 provide get owe
11  cut bringcost 
12 strikeask lend
13  prov takebring 
14 teachpay do
15  refuse allowfind 
16 sprebuy ask
17  leav seepay 
18 wonderhand allow
19  prmit costbuy 
20 frcset teach
Table 3.Top 20 types for VObj  ordered bytypes, 
tokns ad construction faithfulnes
 
The figures are the mean of the values in each ma-
trix. Path a lin vls rg btwen 0 ad 1, 
Open Rogetbtween 4ad 16ad h oters are 
on varying scales where larger values indcate 
greater similarity. Thes tabes show tat theokn 
distribution sample of verb types increases the se-
mantc ohesithe cnstructon over a flat 
verbs list.
 
Similarty 
mesue 
Types 
(sampled)
Tokens 
(top 20)
Faithfulness 
(top 20) 
WordNt   
path 0.1630.3870.245
lc941 1.976 1.385 
wu 0.3120.6530.453
res2.473 4.673 3.748 
jcn 1.0330.3830.190
lin0.259 583 372 
Ope Roget 5.19011.7376.232
Tabl 4.Semantic silarty measur for Vacross n 
by types,tokens and constuction faithfulness
 
Siilarty 
mesue 
Types 
(sampled)
Tokens 
(top 20)
Faithfulnes 
(top 20)
WordNt   
path 0.1750.3160.241
lc1.008 1.654 1.299 
wup 0.3450.5790.457
res2.470 3.942 2.973 
jcn 0.1990.4350.313
lin308 558 406 
Ope Roget 7.86313.01110.768
Tabl 5.Semantic silarty measur for VObj  by 
types, tokens ad contruction fithulnes
 
Sampling the items on the basis of their token fre-
quency weighted for faihfulness also mproves 
semantic homogeneity, althoug it does nt here 
offer any improven over a tkize distrbu-
tion aloe. We not entirely satisfied wh hese 
measures.WordNetverb hirachis ar mucflat-
ter and bushier than ose fr nous, here these 
surs ar moresuccessful. For verbs, distance 
down a synsetis less tlig tha ditce aros. 
As aresult, we are exploring other measurs of the
smantic similarity of verbs inford by nework 
science.We are aso expling the usof wrd 
sense disambiguation techniques to reduce prob-
lems introduced by the ric polysemy of verbs in 
WordNet (e.g give is agnd t 44 difernt syn-
sets) and also in Roget’s. 
Future work 
We plan toply thes mthods the ful range of 
English VACs as described in Francis et al (196)
15
and other construction grammars too. We are par-
ticularly interested inwhether the inventory repre-
sents an optimalpartitoning of verb semantics, 
starting wth basic categories action  
and proceeding to greater specificity via Zipfian 
mapping. We are lso interstd in extnding these 
approaches to learner language to investigate 
whethr fist nd scond lagu larns’ acqui-
siion follows he construction distributionalpro-
files and whether tfactors outlined n Goldberg 
et al. (2004) facilitate acquisition.  
There have been suggestions thatZipfian type-
token frequency distributions are essentially unin-
terestingartifacts. For each motivaed cotrco 
idtified along the lines dcribed in3.3, we have 
begun to makething rndom control distribu-
tions gerated as a random selection of verb types 
of comparable n types an tokes (yed ersatz-
controls). For each of our outcome measures, we 
wil compare the various scores for VAC verb-
typesgathered onthe principled basis ofconstruc-
tion-grammar against those for their cotrols. 
Conclusion 
Meanwhile, thse pilot sudies how sme proise 
in these methodtowardanEnglis verbgramar 
operationalized as an inventory of VACs, their 
verb membership and their type-token frequency 
distributions, their contingency of mapping, and 
their semantic motivations. 
Refernces 
Ands, Ø.E., Nioche, J.Briscoe, T., & Carol, J.
(208). The BNCParsed withRASP4UIMA. 
Procedings of the Sixth Intrnational Language 
Resourcsand Evaluation (LREC08), 28-30.
Bod, R., Hay, J., & Janedy, S. (eds.). (2003). 
Probabilistlinguistic. Cmbridge,MA:MITPres.
Briscoe, E., Carol, J., Wtson R. (206). The 
Second Release ofthe RASP System.Procedingsof
th COLING/ACL 206 Interactiv Presntatio 
Sesions, Sydney,Australi.
Bybe, J.& Hoper, P.(Eds) (201). Frequency and 
thmrgnc of linguistictructur. Amsterda: 
Benjamis. 
Dorogvte,SN., & Mends, J.FF. (2003). Evolution 
of Networks:From BiologicalNets to he Internet 
and W. Oxford: Oxford Uiversity Pres. 
Ellis, .C. (202). Frequency fcts inlanguae 
processing: Areview with mplicatons for theories 
of implicit and explicit language acquisition. Studies 
in Second Lague Acquisition, 24 (2), 143-188. 
Ellis, N.C., & Cadirno, T. (2009).Constructing a 
second la. AnnualReview of Cognive
Linguistic, 7 (Special section). 
Ellis, .C.Fereia-Junior, F.(2009). Constructions 
and their acquisiton: Islands and the distinctveness 
of r occupancy.Annual Review of Cognitive 
Linguistic, 11-139. 
Filmore, C.J., ohns,C. R., & Ptruck, M. R.L. 
(203). Backgroud toFramenet. Internationl 
Journal ofLexicography, 16, 235-250. 
Francis,G.,Hunston, S.,&Manning,E.(Eds.) (1996). 
Grmmar Paerns1:Verbs. The COBUILD Seris. 
London:pe Collins. 
Goldberg, A.E.(2006).Constructions atwork: Th 
nature ofgeneralizaton in language. Oxford: xford
Univrsity Pres. 
Goldbeg,A.E.,Canhiser, D.M., & Sethuraman, N. 
(204). Learning argument structure generalizatios. 
Conitv Linistc, 15, 289–316. 
Gries, S.T,& Sefanowitsch, A.(204). Extendig 
collostructional analysis: a corpus-based perspectve 
on ‘alternatons’.Interntional Journal of Crpus 
Linguisic, 9, 97-129. 
Kennedy, A.(2009).The Open Roget’s Project: 
Eletroni lexial knowledge base. etr. 1st March,
2010: htp:/rogets.site.uottawa.ca/index.shtml
Mason,O., & Hunso, S. (204). The automatic 
recogitionof verbpatterns: A fsibly sdy. 
Internatiol Journal f Crpus Lingistics, 9, 253-
270. 
Miler,G.A. (209). WordNet Aot us. Retriv 
Mach 1,, fromhtp:/wrn.prictondu 
Ninio,A.().Pabrakig vebs  sytaci 
development and the queston of protypical
trasitivity. Journl of Child Lnua, 26, 619-653. 
Pederen, T., Patwadhan, S., & Michelizzi, J. (204). 
WodNt:Similrity– Measrig t Rltedns of 
Concps. Pcedg of Ft A Mig
the orth Amrican Chpter of the Asociatio of
mputainl Liuistc (NAACL 204). 
Shanks, D. R.(1995). Thepsyhology ofassociative 
lerning. New York: Cambridge University Pres. 
Sinclai, J.(2004). Trust he tx: Language, corpusand 
discourse. Lnd: Rutled.
Solé, R. V., Murtra, B., Valverde, S., &Stels, L. 
(205). Language Networks: their structure, functio
and evolution. Trends in Cognitive Scincs, 12. 
Stefanowitsch, A.,&Grs,S.T.(2003). 
Colruis: Ivstigan th intraction betwen
wods an otruco.Interntiol Journal of 
rpLigis, 8, 209-243. 
Zipf, G.K (1935). Thepsyhobiology of lange: An 
introduction to dyamic philo. Cambrid, MA: 
The M.IT. Pres. 
16

