Proceedings of the NAACL HLT 2010 Workshop on Creating Speech and Language Data with Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, pages 168–171,
Los Angeles, California, June 2010. c©2010 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Wisdom of the Crowd’s Ear: Speech Accent Rating and Annotation 
with Amazon Mechanical Turk 
 
 
Stephen A. Kunath Stevn H. Weinberger 
Linguistics Deprtment 
Georetown Univrsity 
Washingt, D.C. 2057 
Program in Liguistics 
3e4 Gere Mason University 
Fairfax, VA 203 
sak68@georgetown.eduweinberg@gmu.edu
 
  
 
 
Abstract 
Human listenrs can almost instanteously 
jdge whtr or ot ther speker is part f 
thir spech cmunity. Th basi of this 
judgmnt is te speaker’s acent. Even tug 
has judg sch cents with as, it has 
ben tremnously difiult o automticly 
valut ad rate acents in ny cnsitent 
mner. This pr dscribes a experimt 
usig te Amazon Mehanicl Turk to de-
velop an utatic speh acent rating 
datset. 
1 Introduction

In linguistics literature and especialy in second 
laae aquistion rsrch, th evaluti f 
humn spech acets relis on umn jdges. 
Wever umns listn to the spech of thrs 
thy ar alost istantly able t dtrmine wetr 
te speker is from the sm language comunity. 
Indd, much f t rsarch i cnt evaltio 
relis on ative speakers to listen to smples f 
acted spech and rt the act sevrity (An-
derson-Hsi,t. l., 192; Cunigham-Anderson 
an Egstrand 198; Gut, 07; Koster a Ket 
193; Me, , Fleg, 195; Munro, 195, 
2001). Two problems aris from the se f this 
methodlgy. On is tht the purly linguistic 
judgents ma be ifiltrated by crtain biase. So 
for xaple, l other things eing equl, sme 
native English judgs may itrpt crtain Vit-
names acents as being more sver than say, Ital-
i cnts whe listi t th Englis uterd by 
speakers from tes language backronds. The 
scond, and r thoreticly interstig problm, 
is that human judgs make ths ratins ased 
upon soe hiden, abstrct nowledge of phonl-
gy. Th mystry of what his knoldge is ad 
contains i real, fr as Gut (207) remarks, “…no 
exct, comprhensive and univrsly ceptd 
dfinitn f orig act exist” (p75). Th task 
of this liguistic and omputaional study is to id 
in defini and uovering this kwlege. 
 
This tudy aims to devlop a method for integrat-
ing acent rtings an judgnts frm a lre 
numbr of hum listenrs, provide through 
Aazon Mecanical Turk(MTurk), t constrct a 
set f traiing dt for an tomated speaker aent 
valutio sytem. This dta n thodlogy wil 
be  resurc that cent resrchers can utilze. It 
rflcts the wisdom of th crowd’s r to hlp de-
termine t cpnets f spech tat difernt 
listrs use to rat th acentdns of no-native 
speakers. 
2 Source
Data 
This task required HIT workers to listen to and rate 
a selction f no-native English spch smpls. 
Th sure f al the spch samles for tis efort 
was Gorg Mson University’s Spech Acnt 
Archive (htp:/acet.gmu.du). Th peh c-
ent rcive ws hosen becase of t hig qual-
ity of sampls as l as th fct hat eac spech 
168
sample had readings of the same lictaion para-
grh. Tis lictain pargrph was desiged to 
include al of the pholoical fetures consir 
part of ntive Englis speh. Aditonaly, arow 
hnetic trascriptions and ponlgicl genrli-
zatios re avilable for each sampl. Each 
speker’s informtion rcrd ontins deogrpi 
informatio ad laguage backgru infrmation. 
Thre ntive ln roups wer selcted fr 
tis tudy: Arabic, Mandarin, and Rusian. The 
motivation for this prticulr selction comes from 
the fct hat eac of thes languages reprsnts a 
difrent lnguge family. Thes lnuags cotin 
ifrt phontic inventoris s wel as 
phonlogical aterns. 
3 HIT
Description 
Our HIT consited of thre sections. The first ec-
tion asked the wrker to dsribe their own ativ 
lagug background an any forign laguge 
knowlede or experice. Askig abut tive and 
freign languag rin alowed s to stimte 
posible rti bias arisg frm xperince with 
second language phonloy. The scond stion f 
th HIT icld tw rating task fr use as  base-
line and to help the orkers et aclimtd to the 
task. Ec wrkr was sd to listen to tw audio 
samples of speaers reaing th same lictin 
paragraph, n of  ntiv Elis spkr and oe 
of  ntive Spanish speaker who started lering 
English lat i life. Th rting scl us was a 
five point Likert scal. After completing the bse-
lin question, workers bgan the third section ad 
wer th asked t listn to fitn sampls f on-
native English speakers read the se lictai 
prgraph. Aftr listnig to ach sample the 
workers wer asked to rate the entdnes of t 
spch on the fiv pint Likrt scale. Th five-
oint sale rats native acent as  1 and ay 
acet s  5. Workrs wr ditonly sked to 
group each spech sample int difernt ative 
lang tgoris. For this questio they wr 
presnted with 3 language family grups: A, B, 
and C. Based on their prcption of each spech 
smple thy wuld atmt o ategriz te fitn 
seakrs into istinct grups native language 
groups. 
 
 
4 Worker
Requirements and Cost 
Due to the type of questions contained in our HIT 
w cam u with svral wrker quiremnts for 
the HIT. he first and most important rquirent 
was that HIT workers be lcated iside of th USA 
so s to limit h numr of no-native English 
speakers. This reqirent als helpd to icrease 
th liliod that h lister woul be familr 
wit varietis of English spch acents coon 
in Amrica. Aditonaly, due to th size f the 
task we had a requiremnt hat ny worker must 
hve at lst  65% aprovl record fr prvios 
HITs on ther MTurk tsk. Aftr lking at ther-
comparbly dificlt as we decide to fer our 
first HIT at $0.75. Subsequnt HITs creasd the 
oferd price to $0. for the task. 
 
5 HIT
Results 
Two HITs wer isued for this task. Each HIT had 
25 rkers. Avrag time for ech worker on tis 
task was aproximtely 12.5 minutes. Inital dat 
nlysi shwed that usrs corectly caried out he 
task. Baselin question results, hown i figr 1, 
indicted that virtaly vry rker ared that 
the nativ English speaker sampl ws a ntive 
spker of lis. Th rtings of the bselin 
Sanish swed that workers eraly agrd that 
it ws eavily acentd spch. In diton to te 
 
 
Figure 1. Mechanical Turk workers ratings of 2 
baslin sampls: Eglish 1 and Spnish 1. The 
numbers on the orizontal xis rerest e ow 
ativ-like t spaker ws ratd. A (1) indicates 
tht th spaker sounds like a native Eglish 
speaker. A (5) indicates th prsec of a heavy 
acnt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baselin samples 
169
hig quality of baseline valutions, workers con-
sitently prvide thir own ative and freign 
laguage information. 
 
Ratings of the spech samples in each question, as 
se i Figur 2, sowd rltivly csitet 
valutions acros wrkers. A more detailed stais-
ticl alysi f inter-orr atings n groupings 
is urentl underway, but he iital staistical test 
show that hr s a consitent coreltion be-
ten certin phonlogial sph patrs ad 
ratigs of acetdes. 
 
6 Future
Work 
This experiment has lready provide a wealth of 
information  ow umn’s rate acnts nd w 
csitet hose ratings are cros  large umber 
of listnrs. Curtly, w are integrtin the ac-
cent ratigs with te phontic trascriptions nd 
th list of identifed lgil speh rcess 
to cnstruct a st of eatures that r corlatd 
with acent rtings. W hv begun t apitlize 
on te Mchaical Turk pardim ad re con-
structing a quliftion test o help us btr u
derstad inter-worker agrment on acent rating. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Workers acent ratings for al spech samples. The orizontal xis indicates the acentdnes rating: (1) is a 
nativ English acnt ad (5) is hevily acnted. Th vrtical xis idictes the umbr of HIT workrs tht provide 
the same rating for the smple. T numbers at e nd of eh languag nam rpresnt he Spech Acent Archi 
sapl id for the language, .g. Madarin.1 indicats that  smple ws the Mandari 1 sakr on t rcive. 
170
This qualifcation test wil include a lrger sample 
of Native English spch dat as wl as  brodr 
selction f oreign aents. In this new qualifca-
tion test wrkrs wil b prested ith  scle to 
rat th speaers acent from nativ-like to havily 
centd. Aditonly, the user wil b asked to 
group the samples ito nativ language fmils. 
Once t user ases this qulifction tst they 
wil thn b abl to work on HITs that re consid-
erably sorter than the rigial ong-form HIT de-
scried in this per. In the nw HITs wrkers wil 
listn to e or mor spc samples at  tim and 
both rat and, if required, tet to group the 
sample rltive to thr spch samples. The slc-
tion critria for thes new samples wil b asd on 
the presnce f pologicl sch process that 
av th ighst crelatin with aent ratings. 
 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank Amazon.com and 
t wrksp rganizrs for providig MTurk 
credits to perform this resarch. 
References  
Anderson-Hsieh, J., Johnson, R., & Kohler, K. 192. 
Th relationsip betwe ative speakr judgments 
of non-ntive ronuciation d vince in sen-
tals, prosdy, ad sylble structr. Language 
Lernig, 42, 529-555. 
Cunigham-Anderson, U., and Engstrand, E., 198. 
Percived strgth ad ietiy of oreig acent in 
Swdish. Phonetic, 46, 138-154. 
Fleg, James E., Muray J. Munro, and Ian R.A. 
MacKy (195). Fctors Afectig Stregth of Per-
ceivd Foreign Aent in a Sond Lanuae. Jour-
nal of th Acoustical Society f Americ, 97, 5, p 
3125-3134. 
Gut, U. 207. Foreign Acent. In C. Muler, (ed.), 
Speaker Clasifcatio I. Brli: Springer. 
Kostr, ., nd Koet, T. 193. The valution f acent 
in the Eglish f Dutchmen. Langge Learing, 43, 
1, 69-92. 
Lipi-Gren, R. 197. English with an Acent. New 
York: outledge. 
Magen, H. 198. The percption of oreign-acentd 
spch. Journal of Pontis, 26, 381-400. 
unro, Mray J. (1995). Nsegmental Factors in For-
eig Acent: Ratings of Filtrd Speh. Studies in 
Scond Laguge Acquistion, 17,  17-34. 
Munr, Mury J. and Tracey M. Derwing (201). 
odeling Percptios of th Acentdns ad Com-
prehnsibilty of L2 Spech: The Role of Speaking 
Rat. Studies in Second Languag Acquistin, 23, p 
451-468. 
Scovel, T. 195. Diferntiation, recogniton, and ienti-
fication i the discrimiti f reig cets. I 
J.Arhibald (), Phonlogical Acquistion and 
Phonlogicl Theory. Hilsdle, NJ: Lawrece Erl-
baum. 
 
171

