Proceedings of the 2011 Workshop on Biomedical Natural Language Processing, ACL-HLT 2011, pages 174–181,
Portland, Oregon, USA, June 23-24, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
 Unlocking Medical Ontologies for Non-Ontology Experts 
 
 
Shao Fen Liang Donia Scott 
School of Computer Science,  School of Informatics,  
The University of Manchester, Oxford Road,  The University of Sussex, Falmer,  
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK Brighton, BN1 9QH, UK 
Fennie.Liang@cs.man.ac.uk D.R.Scott@sussex.ac.uk 
 
Robert Stevens Alan Rector 
School of Computer Science,  School of Computer Science, 
The University of Manchester, Oxford Road,  The University of Manchester, Oxford Road, 
Manchester, M13 9PL, UK Manchester, M13 9PL, UK 
Robert.Stevens@cs.man.ac.uk Rector@cs.man.ac.uk 
 
Abstract 
Ontology authoring is a specialised task requiring amongst 
other things a deep knowledge of the ontology language being 
used. Understanding and reusing ontologies can thus be 
dificult for domain experts, who tend not to be ontology 
experts. To address this problem, we have developed a Natural 
Language Generation system for transforming the axioms that 
form the definitions of ontology classes into Natural Language 
paragraphs. Our method relies on deploying ontology axioms 
into a top-level Rhetorical Structure Theory schema. Axioms 
are ordered and structured with specific rhetorical relations 
under rhetorical structure tres. We describe here an 
implementation that focuses on a sub-module of SNOMED 
CT. With some refinements on articles and layout, the 
resulting paragraphs are fluent and coherent, ofering a way 
for subject specialists to understand an ontology’s content 
without ned to understand its logical representation. 
1 Introduction

SNOMED CT (Spackman and Campbel, 198) is 
widely mandated and promoted as a controled 
vocabulary for electronic health records in several 
countries including the USA, UK, Canada and 
Australia. It is managed by the International Health 
Terminology Standards Development Organisation 
(IHTSDO)
1
. SNOMED describes diagnoses, 
procedures, and the necesary anatomy, biological 
proces (morphology
2
) and the relevant organisms 
that cause disease for over 40,00 distinct 
concepts. It is formulated using a Description 
                                                        
1
 http:/ww.3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
2
 Literally, the altered structure as sen by the pathologist, but 
usualy the evidence for the proces that gave rise to it. 
Logic (DL) (Bader et al., 205). Description 
logics, usually in the form of the Web Ontology 
Language (OWL)
3
 have become a comon means 
of representing ontologies. Description logics in 
general and SNOMED in particular have been 
recognised as dificult to understand and reuse 
(Namgong and Kim, 207;Power et al., 209). 
Even with the more or les human readable, 
Manchester OWL Syntax (Horridge et al., 206) 
and using tols such as Protégé (Knublauch et al., 
2004) the task of understanding ontologies remains 
non-trivial for most domain experts. 
Consider, for example, a clinician seeking 
information about the concept of thoracic cavity 
structure
4
 (i.e., anythig i the chest city). 
SNOMED provides the folowing six axioms: 
1. <Structure of thoracic viscus> 
SubClasOf <Thoracic cavity structure> 
2. <Intrathoracic cardiovascular structure> 
SubClasOf <Thoracic cavity structure> 
3. <Mediastinal structure> 
SubClasOf <Thoracic cavity structure> 
4. <Thoracic cavity structure> 
 SubClasOf <Structure of respiratory 
 system and/or intrathoracic structure> 
5. <Thoracic cavity structure> 
SubClassOf <Thoracic structure> 
6. <Thoracic cavity structure> 
SubClasOf <Body cavity structure> 
                                                        
3
 http:/ww.3.org/TR/owl-features/ 
4
 The SNOMED identifier for this clas is ID: SCT_437904 
174
Although these axioms are shown with the more 
readable Manchester OWL syntax, the represented 
meaning of Thoracic cavity structure wil not be 
easy for the typical clinician to decode. 
Ontology concepts can be much more complex 
than those shown above. Not only can there be 
more axioms, but there can be nested axioms to an 
arbitrary depth. So the comprehension problem 
facing the typical clinician is even greater than that 
just described. It should be reduced, however, if 
the ontological content were presented in a more 
coherent, fluent and natural way – for example as: 
A thoracic cavity structure is a kind of structure 
of the respiratory system and/or intrathoracic 
structure, thoracic structure and body cavity 
structure. It includes a structure of the thoracic 
viscus, an intrathoracic cardiovascular 
structure and a mediastinal structure. 
or, with added layout, as: 
A thoracic cavity structure is a kind of 
• structure of the respiratory system and/or 
intrathoracic structure, 
• thoracic structure, 
and 
• body cavity structure. 
It includes 
• a structure of  the thoracic viscus,  
• an intrathoracic cardiovascular 
structure 
and 
• a mediastinal structure. 
In these (human-generated) texts, the author has 
chosen to retain the general form of the anatomical 
terms as they apear in SNOMED, signalling them 
through the use of italics and introducing in places 
a definite article (e.g., “structure of the thoracic 
viscus”. While these terms (particularly in the 
peculiar form they take in SNOMED names
5
) stil 
present a barie to non-subject-specialists, 
nevertheles the ontological content rendered as 
natural language is now much more acesible to 
non-ontology specialists. 
Using natural language descriptions is obviously 
one way of improving the transparency of 
ontologies. However, authoring such descriptions 
                                                        
5
  To reduce this problem somewhat, we use here the 
‘preferred term’ for given SNOMED names, but even these 
can be quite peculiar, e.g., “renal hypertension complicating 
pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium delivered with 
postnatal complication”. 
is tedious and time-consuming to achieve by hand. 
This is clearly an area where automatic generation 
could be beneficial. With this in mind, we have 
built a verbaliser that renders SNOMED concepts 
as fluent natural language paragraphs. 
2 Mapping
SNOMED to a 
Representation of Coherent Discourse 
Our goal is to use standard techniques for natural 
language generation (NLG) to generate fluent 
paragraph-sized texts for SNOMED concepts 
automatically. 
Verbalisation is a two-staged process of 
deciding what to say and then how to say it. In our 
work the first of these is a non-issue: the content of 
our verbalisation wil be SNOMED concepts. Our 
focus is therefore on deciding how to expres the 
content. 
As with any NLG system, our task begins by 
organising the input content in such a way as to 
provide a structure that wil lead to coherent text, 
as oposed to a string of apparently disconected 
sentences. Given the nature of our problem, we 
need to focus on the semantics of the discourse that 
can accomodate the nature of ontology axioms. 
For this purpose, we have chosen to use Rhetorical 
Structure Theory (RST) (Man and Thompson, 
1987;Mann and Thompson, 1988), as a mechanism 
for organising the ontological content of the 
SNOMED input.  
RST is a theory of discourse that adreses 
issues of semantics, comunication and the nature 
of the coherence of texts, and plays an important 
role in computational methods for generating 
natural language texts (Hovy, 190;Scot and 
Souza, 190;Melish et al., 198;Power et al., 
2003). Acording to the theory, a text is coherent 
when it can be described as a hierarchical structure 
composed of text spans linked by rhetorical 
relations that represent the relevance relation that 
holds betwen them (among the set of 23 relations 
are EVIDENCE, MOTIVAON, CONTRAS, 
ELABORATION, RSUL, CUSE, DION, 
ANTITHESIS, ALTERNATIVE, LIST, CONCESION and 
JUSTIFICATION). Relations can be left implicit in 
the text, but are more often signalled through 
discourse markers – wrds or phrase such as 
“because” for EVIDENCE, “in order to” for 
ENABLEMENT, “although” for ANTITHESIS,  
175
 
Figure 1: axioms and their relations to the clas Thoracic cavity structure 
 
“but” for CONCESION, “and” for LIST, “or” for 
ALTERNATIVE, etc. (Sporleder and Lascarides, 
2008;Calaway, 2003). They can also be signalled 
by punctuation (e.g., a colon for ELABORATION, 
coma between the elements of LIST, etc.).  
In RST, text spans are divided into a schema, 
containing either a nucleus (N) and satellite (S), or 
two or more nuclei. Nuclei contain the information 
that is critical to the comunicative mesage; 
satelites contain less critical information, which 
suport the statements of their nuclei. The relations 
among nuclei and satellites are often expressed as: 
RELATION(N,N) 
RELATION(N,S) 
These expresions conveniently take the same form 
as those expressing the types of ontology axiom, 
e.g.: 
SubClasOf(A, B) 
EquivalentClases(C, D) 
where, SubClasOf and EquivalentClases expres 
relations betwen A and B, and C and D. This 
suggests that with careful selection of RST 
relations, and aplying apropriate discourse 
markers, ontologies can be represented as RST 
structures, and generated as natural language 
paragraphs that are not far from human writen 
text.  
To investigate the feasibility of this proposal, we 
have experimented with feding axioms into RST 
tres, and have achieved a positive outcome. For 
example, the six axioms of the thoracic cavity 
structure concept that we have sen earlier can be 
organised into two groups of relations as shown in 
Figure 1. In the uper group are the super-classes 
of the thoracic cavity structure clas, and in the 
lower are the sub-classes. This way of grouping the 
axioms can better present their relations to the 
class. 
This structure can now be transformed into the 
RST tre shown in Figure 2, where the most 
important element of the mesage is the clas 
Thoracic cavity structure, and this forms the main 
nucleus of the RST tre. The remaining content is 
related to this through an ELABORATION relation, 
the satellite of which is composed of two items of a 
multinucleus LIST, each of which is itself a LIST. 
This structure can be expresed textualy as 
(among others) the two natural language 
descriptions we have shon earlier. Thes texts 
satisfy the requirement of coherence (as defined by 
RST), since each part bears a rhetorical relation to 
the other, and the entire text is itself spaned by a 
single rhetorical relation. 
Our exploration of RST has shown that some 
relations map wel to the characteristic features of 
ontology axioms. For example: 
• the LIST relation captures wel those case 
where a group of axioms in the ontology bear 
the same level of relation to a given clas; 
• the ELABORATION relation aplies generally to 
conect diferent notions of axioms to a class 
(i.e., super-, suband definigclases), in 
order to provide additional descriptive 
information to the clas; 
• the CONDITION relation genraly aplies in 
cases where an axiom has property 
restrictions. 
We also found that some rhetorical relations 
appear to bear a one-to-one mapping with logical 
forms of axioms, such as ALTERNATIVE to the 
logical or, and LIST to the logical and. 
Our experience and the evidence over many 
practical cases have indicated that the ful set of 
rhetorical relations is unlikely to be aplied for 
ontology verbalisation. In particular, the set of so-
called presentational reltions are unlikly t 
apply, as ontology authors do not normally
176
 
Figure 2: RST tre of the clas Thoracic cavity structure with six axioms 
 
create comparisons or attempt to state preferences 
amongst classes. (For example, SNOMED has no 
comparison operator between diferent treatments 
of diseases). 
In adition, even within the set of informational 
relations (Moser and More, 196), there are 
several that wil not be found in ontolgies. For 
example, since each axiom in an ontology is 
assumed to be true, using one axiom as an 
EVIDENCE of another axiom would be redundant. 
Similarly, using one axiom to JUSTIFY another 
axiom is not a conventional way of building 
ontologies. 
3 Aplying
RST 
Our investigations have shown that it is posible to 
build a top-level RST schema to cover all axioms 
with diferent meanings related to a clas (se 
Figure 3). In SNOMED, axioms relating to a 
concept (i.e., class) can be either direct or indirect. 
Direct axioms describe the topic clas directly, in 
which the topic clas is the first clas apearing in 
those axioms. Indirect axioms provide extra 
information, typically about how a clas is used 
with other classes. For example, the axiom 
<Structure of thoracic viscus>  
 SubClasOf(<Structure of viscus> and 
 <Thoracic cavity structure>) 
can be placed as direct information about structure 
of thoracic viscus; it can also be placed as indirect 
information about Structure of viscus or Thoracic 
cavity structure.  
Within the categories of direct and indirect 
information, axioms are also clasified as either 
simple or complex. This distinction allows us to 
control the length of the verbalisation, since most 
complex axioms tend to be translated into longer 
sentences, involving as they do more properties 
and value restrictions. Simple axioms, on the other 
hand, describe only clas relations, the length of 
which can be beter controled. 
For a given SNOMED clas, our verbalisation 
proces starts with its super-, suband equivalent-
classes, within an ELABORATION relation.  The use 
of the ELABORATION relation alows the first part 
of the text to connect al clases relating to the 
topic clas; the second part then starts to introduce 
more complex information directly related to the 
topic clas. The ELABORATION relation is used 
until al the direct information has been included. 
Next the CONCESION relation is aplied to conect 
direct and indirect information. 
Additionaly, each indirect axiom should have 
its own subject, and therefore, they cannot be 
combined smothly into a single sentence. We 
therefore use LIST as the relation for these axioms, 
since they are equaly weighted, and changing the 
order among them does not afect the meaning of 
the whole paragraph. 
Every complex axiom is translated using a 
CONDITION relation. This is because complex 
axioms contain conditional information to their 
subject class. For example: 
<Disorder of soft tisue of thoracic cavity>
 EquivalentTo(<Disorder of soft tisue of 
  body cavity> 
        and (<RoleGroup> some 
177
 
 
Figure 3: Top-level RST schema for SNOMED 
 
  (<Finding site> some  
  <Thoracic cavity structure>) 
      and (<RoleGroup> some  
   (<Finding site> some 
   <Soft tissues>)) 
The condition in this axiom starts from the first 
“and” in the fourth line and extends to the end of 
the axiom.  This condition neds to be attached to 
the clas Disorder of soft tisue of body cavity to be 
equivalent to the Disorder of soft tisue of thoracic 
cavity clas. We aply this rule to al complex 
axioms in an ontology. 
4 Verbalising
Individual Axioms 
We use a template-based technique for verbalising 
the axioms as sentences. We have carefully 
selected translations of the SNOMED expressions. 
Our choice has ben driven by an atempt t 
translate each axiom so as to preserve the meaning 
in the ontology and to avoid introducing 
misleading information. For example, the 
convention within ontologies is to conceptualise 
super-classes as an “is a” relation. However, 
translating this term as the English string “is a” can 
lead to misunderstanding, since the English 
expression can also be used to mean “equal to”. 
Clearly, though, a clas is not equal to its super-
class. In this context, a more accurate translation is 
“is a kind of”.  We show some of these translations 
in Table 1. 
 
Relation to the topic 
clas X 
Translation 
wording 
With its simple super-
class 
X is a kind of … 
With its complex super-
class 
X is a kind of … 
that … 
With its simple sub-class X includes … 
With its simple equivalent 
class 
X is defined as … 
With its complex 
equivalent class 
X is defined as … 
that 
  Table 1: Translations for axiom types 
 
Consider for example, the SNOMED content: 
<Benign hypertensive renal disease>  
 SubClasOf <Hypertensive renal disease> 
 <Benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis>  
 SubClasOf <Benign hypertensive renal 
   disease> 
 <Benign hypertensive heart AND renal 
 disease> 
 SubClasOf <Benign hypertensive renal 
   disease> 
 <Benign hypertensive renal disease> 
 SubClasOf <Hypertensive renal disease>  
178
  and (<Finding site> some 
   <Kidney structure>) 
 <Benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis>  
 SubClasOf <Benign hypertensive renal 
   disease> 
  and <Arteriolar nephrosclerosis> 
 <Benign hypertensive heart AND renal 
disease> 
 EquivalentTo<Benign hypertensive renal 
   disease> 
  and <Benign hypertensive heart 
   disease> 
  and <Hypertensive heart AND 
   renal disease> 
Our generator describes Benign hypertensive renal 
disease with its super-class as 
“Benign hypertensive renal disease is a kind of 
hypertensive renal disease.” 
and with its sub-classes as 
“Benign hypertensive renal disease includes 
benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis and benign 
hypertensive heart and renal disease.” 
There are two sub-clases in the above sentence, 
and we have signalled their conection (in a LIST 
relation) with “and” as the discourse marker. In 
those cases where there are more than two sub-
classes, we use instead a coma “,” except for the 
last mentioned, where we introduce “and”. The 
same aproach is aplied to super-classes. 
In those cases where a clas has both superand 
sub-classes to describe, we introduce the second 
sentence with “It” thus achieving beter linguistic 
cohesion by avoiding having to repeat the same 
subject from the first sentence. 
To bridge simple-direct and complex-direct 
axioms, we use “Aditionally” to signal the 
introduction of more information relevant to the 
topic.  For example to continue from the above two 
sentences, we have 
“Aditionally, bnig hypertnsive renal 
disease is a kind of hypertensive renal disease 
that has a finding site in a kidney structure.” 
All direct information should have ben consumed 
at this point, and we now need some bridging 
expression to signal the introduction of the indirect 
axioms. For this we use “Another relevant aspect 
of” or “Other relevant aspects of”, depending on 
the number of axioms in the set. Continuing with 
our example, we now have 
“Other relevant aspects of benign hypertensive 
renal disease include the following: benign 
arteriolar nephrosclerosis is a kind of benign 
hypertensive renal disease and artolar
nephrosclerosis; benign hypertensive heart and 
renal disease is defined as benign hypertensive 
renal disease, benign hypertensive heart disease 
and hypertensive heart and renal disease.” 
The improved transparency of the underlying 
ontological content can be clearly demonstrated by 
comparison with the SNOMED input from which 
it is derived. 
The output that we have shown so far has al 
been generated as runing text with minimal 
formating except for the use of italic face for 
SNOMED labels. This works wel for simple 
examples, but as can be seen from the previous 
example, readability becomes increasingly 
challenged as the expressions become longer. For 
this reason, we have also included in our system 
the facility to use layout to convey the logical 
structure of the ontological content. For example, 
the content shown above can also be generated as 
 “Benign hypertensive renal disease is a kind of 
hypertensive renal disease. It includes 
• benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis 
 and 
• benign hypertensive heart and renal 
disease. 
Additionaly, benign hypertensive renal disease 
is a kind of hypertensive renal disease that has a 
finding site in a kidney structure. Other relevant 
aspects of benign hypertensive renal disease 
include the following: 
• benign arteriolar nephrosclerosis is 
defined as benign hypertensive renal 
disease and arteriolar nephrosclerosis; 
• benign hypertensive heart and renal 
disease is defined as bnign 
hypertensive renal disease, benign 
hypertensive heart disease and 
hypertensive heart and renal disease.” 
5 Issues
Related to Fluency 
The quality of a text, whether humanor machine
generated, is to a large extent determined by its 
fitnes for purpose. For example, the 
characteristics of a scientific article, a newspaper 
article or a twiter wil be rather diferent, even 
though they may convey the same “mesage”.  The 
same is true for natural language descriptions of 
179
ontological content, which can range from the 
fuly-fluent to the closely literal (e.g., something 
likely to be thought of as a kind of “SNOMED-
ese”), depending on whether it is intended, say, for 
inclusion in a narative sumary of an electronic 
patient record (Halet et al., 206) or for ontology 
developers or users who want to know the precise 
ontological representation of some part of the 
ontology.  So far, our aim has been to generate 
descriptions that fal into the later category. For 
this purpose we retain the full expresions of the 
pseudo-English labels found in the official 
SNOMED Descriptions document
6, representing 
them within our generation proces as “quotes” 
(Melish et al., 206) and signaling them through 
the use of italics. The texts still ned to be 
gramatical, however, and achieving this can be 
challenging. In what folows we give a few 
examples of why this is so. 
It is a convention of ontology design to treat 
each class as singular; we folow this convention, 
introducing each clas with the indefinite article.  
So, for example, the SNOMED labels 
<Intrathoracic cardiovascular structure> 
and 
< Structure of thoracic viscus> 
can be expressed straightforwardly as “a structure 
of thoracic viscus” and “an intratrathoracic 
cardiovascular structure”.  However, matters are 
not so simple. For example, 
<Heart structure> 
wil require the definite article (“the heart 
structure”) and while  
<Structure of thoracic viscus> 
wil atract an indefinite article at its front, it 
would read much beter if it also had a definite 
article within it, giving “a structure of the thoracic 
viscus”. A similar story holds for 
<Abdomen and pelvis> 
which properly should be “the abdomen and 
pelvis” or “the abdomen and the pelvis”. Achieving 
this level of gramaticality will rely on knowledge 
that, for example, the human body contains only 
one heart and abdomen. Interestingly, this 
information is not captured within the SNOMED 
                                                        
6
 
http:/ww.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/licensedcontent/snome
dctarchive.html 
ontology, and so external resources wil be 
required. Aditionaly, introducing articles within 
the labels (as in “abdomen and the pelvis”, above) 
wil require some level of natural language 
interpretation of the labels themselves.   
The same aplies to number. While we curently 
folow the SNOMED convention of describing 
entities in the singular, there are occasions where 
the plural is called for. For example: 
<Abdominal vascular structure> 
 SubClasOf <Abdomial structure> 
  SubClasOf <Lower body part 
          structure> 
<Abdominal cavity structure> 
 SubClasOf <Abdominal structure> 
  SubClasOf <Lower body part 
          structure> 
would be beter expresed as “Lower body part 
structures include al abdominal structures”, 
instead of as curently “A lower body part structure 
includes an abdominal structure”. 
Another isue to consider is the roles of 
properties in SNOMED. This problem can be 
characterised by the folowing example: 
<Hypertension secondary to kidney transplant>  
 EquivalentTo (<Hypertension asociated 
   with transplantation> 
      and (<After> some <Transplant of 
  kidney>)> 
which is curently verbalised as 
Hypertension secondary to kidney transplant is 
defined as hypertension associated with 
transplantation that has an after in a transplant 
of kidney. 
In SNOMED, the property after is used to give 
an after-effect (i.e., “Hypertension asociated with 
transplantation” is an after-effect of a kidney 
transplant), and for a non-SNOMED expert, this 
meaning is not at all clear in the generated text. 
This aplies to many properties in SNOMED. 
Consider for example, the properties “finding site” 
and “clinical course” as in: 
“Chronic heart disease is defined as a chronic 
disease of cardiovascular system that is a heart 
disease, and has a clinical course in a chronic.” 
and 
“Abdominal organ finding is a general finding 
of abdomen that has a finding site in a structure 
of abdominal viscus.” 
180
The extent to which isues such as these are treated 
within the generation proces wil, as we 
mentioned before, be a mater of how fluent the 
text neds to be for a given purpose. 
6 Conclusion

We have described a method for generating 
coherent and fairly fluent natural language 
descriptions of ontologies, and have shown how 
the method can be applied successfuly to 
SNOMED CT, a medical terminology whose use is 
widely mandated. Through the aplication of 
Rhetorical Structure Theory, the ontological 
content is organised into a discourse schema that 
allows us to generate appropriate discourse 
markers, pronouns, punctuation and layout, thereby 
making it more easily acesible to those who are 
not fully familiar with the ontology language in 
use.  In its current form, the system is aimed at 
readers who care how the SNOMED is constructed 
– for example, those wishing to know the precise 
meaning of a given clas. We believe there is no 
single solution to satisfying a wider range of user 
interests, and thus of text types. While we continue 
to work towards improving the output of our 
system, evaluating the output with non-ontology 
specialists, and testing our method with other 
ontologies and ontology languages, achieving fully 
fluent natural language is beyond the scope of our 
system. We are not at this point overly concerned 
by this limitation, as the need for clarity and 
transparency of ontologies is, we believe, more 
presing than the need for fully fluent natural 
language descriptions. 
Acknowledgments 
This work has ben undertaken as part of the 
Semantic Web Authoring Tol (SWAT) project 
(se ww.swatproject.org), supported by the UK 
Enginering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council (EPSRC) grant EP/G032459/1 to the 
University of Manchester, the University of 
Susex, and the Open University. 
 
References 
Franz Bader, Ian Horocks and Ulrike Satler. 205. 
Description logics as ontology languages for the 
semantic web, Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Inteligence, 2605: 28-248. 
Charles B. Calaway. 203. Integrating discourse 
markers into a pipelined natural language generation 
architecture, 41st Anual Meeting on Asociation 
for Computational Linguistics, 1: 264-271. 
Catalina Halet, Richard Power and Donia Scot. 206. 
Sumarisation and Visualisation of e-Health Data 
Repositories. UK E-Science Al-Hands Meting, 
pages 18-21. 
Mathew Horridge, Nicholas Drumond, John 
Goodwin, et al. 206. The Manchester OWL syntax. 
2006 OWL: Experiences and Directions 
(OWLED’06). 
Holger Knublauch, Ray W. Fergerson, Natalya Fridman 
Noy, et al. 204. The Protégé OWL plugin: an open 
development environment for Semantic Web 
applications. International Semantic eb 
Conference, pages 29-243. 
Wiliam C. Man and Sandra A. Thompson. 1987. 
Rhetorical Structure Theory: a theory of text 
organization, USC/Information Sciences Institute 
Technical Report Number RS-87-190 Marina del 
Rey, CA. 
Wiliam C. Man and Sandra A. Thompson. 198. 
Rhetorical Structure Theory: toward a functional 
theory of text organisation, Text, 8(3): 243-281. 
Chris Melish, Donia Scot, Lyne Cahil Daniel Paiva, 
et al. 206. A reference architecture for natural 
language generation systems, Natural Language 
Enginering, 12(1): 1-34. 
Megan Moser and Johana D. Moore. 196. Toward a 
synthesis of two acounts of discourse structure, 
Computational Linguistics, 2(3): 409-420. 
Hyun Namgong and Hong-Gee Kim. 207. Ontology-
based controlled natural language editor using CFG 
with lexical dependency. 6th international, the 
Semantic Web, and 2nd Asian Conference on Asian 
Semantic eb Conference, pages 353-366. Springer 
Verlag Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Richard Power, Robert Stevens, Donia Scott, et al. 
2009. Editing OWL through generated CNL. 2009 
Workshop on Controled Natural Language 
(CNL'09), Maretimo, Italy. 
Kent A. Spackman and Keith E. Campbel. 198. 
Compositional concept representation using 
SNOMED: Towards further convergence of clinical 
terminologies, Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Asociation: 740-744. 
Caroline Sporleder and Alex Lascarides. 208. Using 
automatically labelled examples to classify 
rhetorical relations: an asesment, Natural 
Language Enginering, 14(3): 369-416. 
 
 
181

