Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 101–109,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Arabic Text to Arabic Sign Language Translation System for the Deaf and
Hearing-Impaired Community
Abdulaziz Almohimeed
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
aia07r@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Mike Wald
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
mw@ecs.soton.ac.uk
R. I. Damper
University of Southampton
United Kingdom
rid@ecs.soton.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper describes a machine translation
system that offers many deaf and hearing-
impaired people the chance to access pub-
lished information in Arabic by translating
text into their first language, Arabic Sign Lan-
guage (ArSL). The system was created under
the close guidance of a team that included
three deaf native signers and one ArSL in-
terpreter. We discuss problems inherent in
the design and development of such transla-
tion systems and review previous ArSL ma-
chine translation systems, which all too often
demonstrate a lack of collaboration between
engineers and the deaf community. We de-
scribe and explain in detail both the adapted
translation approach chosen for the proposed
system and the ArSL corpus that we collected
for this purpose. The corpus has 203 signed
sentences (with 710 distinct signs) with con-
tent restricted to the domain of instructional
language as typically used in deaf education.
Evaluation shows that the system produces
translated sign sentences outputs with an av-
erage word error rate of 46.7% and an average
position error rate of 29.4% using leave-one-
out cross validation. The most frequent source
of errors is missing signs in the corpus; this
could be addressed in future by collecting
more corpus material.
1 Introduction
Machine translation (MT) has developed rapidly
since 1947, when Warren Weaver first suggested
the use of computers to translate natural languages
(Augarten, 1984). Presently, this technology offers
a potential chance for ArSL signers to benefit by,
for instance, giving them access to texts published in
Arabic. ArSL and general sign language (SL) have
inherent ambiguity problems that should be taken
into account while designing any ArSL translation
system. Therefore, ArSL translation must be done
through close collaboration with the deaf commu-
nity and signing experts. This paper describes a
full prototype MT system that translates Arabic
texts into deaf and hearing-impaired peoples’ first
language, Arabic Sign Language (ArSL). It is the
result of extended collaboration between engineers
and a team consisting of three deaf native signers
and one ArSL interpreter.
Most existing systems have wrongly assumed
that ArSL is dependent on the Arabic language
(Mohandes, 2006; Alnafjan, 2008; Halawani, 2008;
Al-Khalifa, 2010). These systems make word-to-
sign translations without regard to ArSL’s unique
linguistic characteristics, such as its own grammar,
structure, and idioms, as well as regional variations
(Abdel-Fateh, 2004) or translate into finger-spelling
signs that only exist in Arabic, not in ArSL.
This paper begins by providing a brief back-
ground of ArSL. It then addresses the problems and
misconceptions plaguing previous ArSL systems.
Thereafter, it describes related works built on the
assumption of one of the two misconceptions men-
tioned above. The rest of the paper will present an
example-based machine translation (EBMT) system
that translates published Arabic texts to make them
accessible to deaf and hearing-impaired people who
use ArSL.
101

