Proceedings of the SIGDIAL 2011: the 12th Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Discourse and Dialogue, pages 59–66,
Portland, Oregon, June 17-18, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Spoken Dialogue System based on Information Extraction
using Similarity of Predicate Argument Structures
Koichiro Yoshino, Shinsuke Mori and Tatsuya Kawahara
School of Informatics, Kyoto University
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan
Abstract
We present a novel scheme of spoken dialogue
systems which uses the up-to-date informa-
tion on the web. The scheme is based on in-
formation extraction which is defined by the
predicate-argument (P-A) structure and real-
ized by semantic parsing. Based on the in-
formation structure, the dialogue system can
perform question answering and also proac-
tive information presentation. Feasibility of
this scheme is demonstrated with experiments
using a domain of baseball news. In order to
automatically select useful domain-dependent
P-A templates, statistical measures are intro-
duced, resulting to a completely unsupervised
learning of the information structure given a
corpus. Similarity measures of P-A structures
are also introduced to select relevant infor-
mation. An experimental evaluation shows
that the proposed system can make more rel-
evant responses compared with the conven-
tional ”bag-of-words” scheme.
1 Introduction
Recently, a huge amount of information is accumu-
lated and distributed on the web day by day. As a
result, many people get information via web rather
than the conventional mass media. On the other
hand, the amount of information on the web is so
huge that we often encounter the difficulty in finding
information we want. Keyword search is the most
widely-used means for the web information access.
However, this style is not necessarily the best for
information demands of all users who do not have
definite goals or just want to know what would be
interesting. To cope with user’s vague information
demands is an important mission for interactive spo-
ken dialogue systems. Moreover, supporting user’s
information collection in a small-talk style is one of
the new directions of spoken dialogue systems.
Existing spoken dialogue systems can be clas-
sified into two types (T.Kawahara, 2009): those
using relational databases (RDB) such as the Air-
line Travel Information System (ATIS) (D.A.Dahl,
1994), and those using information retrieval tech-
niques based on statistical document matching
(T.Misu and T.Kawahara, 2010). The first scheme
can achieve a well-defined task by using a struc-
tural database, but this scheme cannot be applied to
the web information in which the structure and task
are not well defined. The second scheme has been
studied to handle large-scale texts such as web, but
most of the conventional systems adopt a “bag-of-
words” model, and naive statistical matching often
generates irrelevant responses which have nothing
to do with the user’s requests. Our proposed scheme
solves this problem by using information extraction
based on semantic parsing from web texts, with-
out constructing an RDB. We adopt the predicate-
argument (P-A) structure generated by a parser as
a baseline, but every P-A structure is not useful for
information extraction and retrieval(Y.Kiyota et al.,
2002; M.O.Dzikovska et al., 2003; S.Harabagiu et
al., 2005). In fact, the useful information structure
is dependent on domains. Conventionally, the tem-
plates for information extraction were hand-crafted
(R.Grishman, 2003), but this heuristic process is so
costly that it cannot be applied to a variety of do-
mains on the web. In this paper, therefore, we pro-
59

