Proceedings of the 6th Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pages 303–308,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30–31, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
Personal Translator at WMT201 
A rule-based MTsystem with hybrid components 
 
 
Vera Aleksić Gregor Thurmair 
Linguatec Gmbh Linguatec Gmbh 
Gottfried-Keller-Str. 12 Gottfried-Keller-Str. 12 
Munich, Germany Munich, Germany 
v.aleksic@linguatec.de g.thurmair@linguatec.de 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents the Linguatec 
submission to the WMT 201 sixth 
workshop on statistical machine 
translation. It describes the architecture of 
our machine translation system ‘Personal 
Translator’ (hereinafter also referred to as 
PT), developed by Linguatec, which is a 
rule-based translation system, enriched by 
statistical aproaches. 
We participate for the German-English 
translation direction. For the curent 
submission we have chosen the latest 
comercial version of the system, PT14. 
The translation quality improvement for the 
submission was done mainly by lexicon 
tuning:  detection of unknown words, 
extracting of posible translations, partly 
from the wmt1 training corpora, and 
enlarging the lexicon by manually coding 
the chosen transfer candidates. 
1 Introduction

The origin of the PT technology dates back to the 
80’s when a translation system based on logic 
programing and slot gramars was developed by 
Michael McCord at IBM T.J. Watson Research 
Center. In many years of development the 
translation engine has ben driven forward and 
enhanced. Most recently we have added statistical 
approaches for tasks such as erroneous input 
corection, subject area recognition and word 
disambiguation. Today ‘Personal Translator’ is one 
of the leading programs in the translation 
technology field. It is a comercial MT system 
whose product range includes 7 language pairs, i.e. 
14 translation directions, for single users and 
networks. Linguatec is a leading provider of 
language-technology software for office use in 
Germany. In adition to machine translation, we 
develop and provide commercial products in the 
fields of spech recognition and spech synthesis. 
Linguatec is the only company to have won the 
European Information Technology Prize thre 
times. 
2 System
fundamentals 
Personal Translator is implemented as a modular 
system which basicaly consists of the folowing 
components: 
• the gramar, written in Prolog, based on 
the concept of slot gramar 
• the lexicon, administrated in the data base 
internally called TransLexis 
• additional morphological analysers writen 
partly in C and C+ 
• hybrid (rule-based and statistical) methods 
for word disambiguation, subject area 
recognition and spel-checking 
• a range of preand post-procesing 
components such as format converters for 
303
html, pdf, doc, txt and rtf formats, sentence 
spliter, tokeniser, lematizer. 
As Personal Translator is a comercial system, 
aiming at providing a complete translator work 
bench and creating added value for users, it 
integrates a wide range of advanced features such 
as: 
• Translation memory system for 
management, creation, analysis and 
maintenance of  TMs, as wel as large 
system modules, containing tens of 
thousands of sentence pairs 
• Translation project management tol, 
enabling the user to save and administer al 
important translation settings and project 
relevant options 
• Text to spech functionality to suport 
editing and learning processes such as text 
revision/correction in the language(s) 
mastered by the user, or  geting a feeling 
for the corect pronunciation in a foreign 
language, to name just a few. 
2.1 LMT
and Slot Grammar 
Personal Translator is based on the LMT (Logic 
programing based Machine Translation). The 
core of LMT uses the principles of slot gramar, 
a grammatical description system developed 
originaly by Michael McCord
1
 at IBM. 
Slot gramar is based on the concept of word 
valence. It is dependency oriented, i.e. each phrase 
has a head word. Each (head) word is characterised 
by slots whic represnt empty plaes in it 
gramatical surroundings such as subject, object, 
modifier etc. which can be realised in text or not. 
The slots represent either complements of the 
head word which have to be defined in the lexicon 
or adjuncts which are rather asociated with the 
part of spech and defined more generaly in the 
gramar rules. The possible slot filers ar 
typified by their morphological, syntactic or 
semantic properties. The analysis of a word is 
finished and the phrase is considered as satisfied if 
the apropriate fillers are found in the text and all 
(obligatory) slots of the word are filed 
                                                             
1
 McCord (1989); McCord, Vernth (192) 
3 Advanced
translation features 
There are some wel-known restrictions concerning 
the automatic translation proces. One of them is 
the ability of most MT systems to operate on only 
one sentence at a time. The same is also true for 
the PT but only to a limited degre. PT integrates 
several methods for semantic and context analysis 
on multi-sentence level and for the identification of 
concepts which are repeated throughout the text. 
This aplies in particular to the recognition of 
pronoun references and coreference analysis of 
proper names, as wel as subject area recognition 
and neural transfer which are described further 
below. 
3.1 Recognition
of pronoun reference 
Pronouns can refer to other words (their 
antecedents) which had occured in the previous 
text. When translating from German into English 
and vice versa the fact that e.g. the English 
personal pronouns he/she aply only to humans 
and it to al other things, wheras in Gera 
er/sie/es can rf to ay noun, has to be 
considered when searching for appropriate 
translation: 
This is a desk. It is new.  
Dies ist ein Schreibtisch. Er ist neu. 
versus: 
This is a bag. It is new. 
Dies ist eine Tasche. Sie ist neu. 
The user can either select the translation option 
„Automatic recognition of pronoun reference“, 
when translating a continuous text, or deselect it in 
case of translating lists of independent sentences 
(as we did for the current submision). If this 
option is deselected, the PT output for the 
sentences above reads as folows: 
Dies ist ein Schreibtisch. Es ist neu.  
Dies ist eine Tasche. Es ist neu.  
Also the translation of other words in the context 
can benefit from corect pronoun reference 
recognition: 
 The dogs found biscuits. They ate them. 
 Die Hunde fanden Kekse. Sie fraßen sie. 
versus: 
The children found biscuits. They ate them. 
 Die Kinder fanden Kekse. Sie aßen sie. 
The last example demonstrates an improvement in 
the translation of the verb eat which is to be 
translated into German with fresen if its subject is 
304
an animal or with essen if the subject is a human. 
The pronoun they in the first sentence refrs to 
dogs (animals), in the second to children (humans) 
respectively. 
3.2 Named
entity recognition 
The treatment of proper names is a real challenge 
for machine translation. There is a huge number of 
proper names, even growing constantly if e.g. the 
companies and product names are considered. 
Furthermore, person names are constantly 
changing in their degree of topicality, so it is not of 
much use to have Kohl and Fischer in the lexicon 
when the texts to be translated speak about Merkel 
and Rösler. As such, the proper names are 
unsuitable to be primarily stored in the lexicon. 
The second problem is homography: If a proper 
name is speled in the same way as a common 
word, it is very likely to be translated by an MT 
system (Brown => Braun; Metzger => Butcher). 
Personal Translator integrates a named entity 
recognition component which runs both: 
• as a pre-procesing tool: It puts mark-ups on 
the proper names to exclude them of other 
pre-procesing components such as e.g. 
spel checker 
• as part of the translation process, integrated 
into the lexicon and the complete analysis-
transfer-generation proces: Morphological 
and syntactic analysis/generation bases 
among other things on semantic roles 
(person, place…), as the proper names have 
special inflection paterns  and specific 
syntactic behaviour (preposition  slots, 
appositions etc.). 
By this, we could achieve an increase in translation 
quality of about 30% for sentences containing 
proper names.
2
 
3.3 Word
sense disambiguation 
Another important isue is the treatment of 
ambiguous words. Most glosaries contain several 
milion translations, among them large amounts of 
words with multiple meanings. Traditionaly, 
‘Personal Translator’ uses several ways to 
disambiguate ambiguous words and select the most 
proper translation: 
• Interpretion of gender/number and other 
morphosyntactic information: 
                                                             
2
 cf. Thurmair (205) 
der Kiefer (m) = jaw 
die Kiefer (f) = pine 
minute (sg) = Minute 
minutes (pl) = Protokol 
• Analysis of slot filers: 
anmachen (Licht) = turn on (light) 
anmachen (Salat) = prepare (salad) 
anmachen (jmd.) = chat (s.o.) up  
bestehen (auf ) = insist (on) 
bestehen (aus) = be made (of) 
• Use of orthographic information: 
fest (lower case) = stable, firm 
Fest (capitalised) = celebration 
• Definition of diferent subject area codes for 
the translations: 
die Mutter (general) = mother 
die utter (techn.) = nut 
 
4 Hybrid
technology 
All these disambiguation methods are labour-
intensive in terms of manual coding eforts, and 
they require, to a certain extent, user interaction 
(e.g. selecting apropriate options such as subject 
area) that in turn needs reliable knowledge of the 
contents to be translated which is often not the 
case. And not at least, manual seting of the 
disambiguation contexts is not only ineficient but 
also prone to errors. 
For these reasons Linguatec continualy tests new, 
innovative solutions to reduce manual coding 
efforts and increase translation quality. Therefore it 
seemed obvious to try to draw statistical 
significant, reliable, and empiricaly-sound 
information from the immense Linguatec corpus 
and enrich the RMT with this knowledge. Thus an 
innovative hybrid component, which has ben filed 
as patent
3, has ben developed. 
4.1 Neural
transfer 
We as humans rarely have problems to distinguish 
betwen two or more diferent meanings of a word. 
The decision hapens automaticaly, suported by 
accessing the world knowledge stored in our brains. 
Many eforts have ben made to artificialy imitate 
these proceses. In linguistics, traditionally 
ontologies have been created which aim at 
                                                             
3
 cf. Linguatec Patent „Hybrid transfer selection in Machine 
Translation“ US: 1/85.68, EPA: Nr. 05715789.3 
305
reflecting the relations and the hierarchy in the 
nature. In information technology, artificial neural 
networks try to approximate the operation of the 
human brain. Linguatec’s hybrid disambiguation 
model tries to single out the best translation for a 
word by identifying its semantic network. We cal 
it ‘neural transfer’. 
The disambiguation model for the neural 
transfer has ben trained on a significant amount of 
diferent contexts for each lexicon entry with 
multiple translations, where this method could be 
considered as appropriate. Clusters of diferent 
meanings of words were built manualy and 
statistical methods were aplied on them in order 
to identify the most distinctive terms in their 
suroundings and represent the results in neural 
networks. The neural transfer technology has been 
integrated into the PT by modifying the afected 
lexicon entries, and by ading a pre-procesing 
component which asigns a semantic net to the 
affected text passage. 
The neural transfer enables the PT to 
‘understand’ the context beyond sentence 
boundaries. Thus it is possible to deliver two 
diferent translations for the word Gericht (court, 
dish) in absolutely identical sentences, depending 
on the textual context: 
Ich kan mich noch an dieses Gericht erinnern. 
Es hat die Klage meiner Firma auf 
Entschädigung abgewiesen. 
I can stil remember this court. It has rejected 
the complaint of my company on reimbursement. 
versus: 
Ich kan mich noch an dieses Gericht erinnern. 
Es war eines dieser Gerichte aus der Küche der 
Balkanländer, mit Gemüse und Knoblauch. 
I can stil remember this dish. It was one of 
these dishes from the kitchen of the Balkan 
States with vegetables and garlic. 
The test results showed an improvement of the 
translation quality by about 40% for texts 
containing the affected concepts. 
4.2 Automatic
subject area recognition 
In order to overcome the problems mentioned 
above (manual coding effort, required user 
interaction), a component for automatic topic 
identification has ben developed and integrated 
into the PT. Its principle works in a similar way to 
neural transfer. The most important diference is 
that the automatic topic identifier asigns the 
recognised subject area to the whole text to be 
translated, whereas the neural transfer can operate 
on the single paragraph level. 
4.3 SmartCorect

Regarding the enormous amount of texts to be 
translated, most of which are from internet or other 
unscanned sources, it is not reasonable to expect 
from MT users to kep control of corect speling. 
Nevertheles, a MT system is only able to translate 
corectly spelled words. For these reasons most 
MT systems, as wel as text procesing 
programes, include a spelchecker. The problem 
is that they mostly just identify the typos/spelling 
errors and leave it up to the user to chose the 
corect form from a list of sugestions. This is 
proces which requires intensive user interaction 
and experience has taught us, that users are not 
always ready to invest their time. In addition, this 
can only be expected if the text to be corected 
belongs to the language mastered by the user. 
Therefore Linguatec developed SmartCorect 
which not only recognises speling erors in the 
text but also corects them automaticaly. Trained 
on very large corpora, the model is likely to detect 
the best variant in nearly all cases. Clever enough, 
it coperates with the named entities recogniser 
and thus does not identify unknown proper names 
as spelling errors. Entries from the user lexicons 
are also save from SmartCorect intervention. 
However, a major part of the mispeling 
corections is already performed in a pre-
procesing step, which adopts some proven 
methods
4
 to identify and corect frequent erors, 
such as leter deletion, insertion, substitution, 
inversion and duplication. 
5 WMT2011
Submision 
We participate for the German-English translation 
direction. Linguatec has not used the training 
corpus because we wanted to submit the results of 
our general purpose MT system. 
The only system tuning consisted of lexicon 
coding. Unknown words were detected 
automatically by analysing the test set. Apropriate 
translations were found, some of them from the 
training corpus. About 20 terms were manually 
coded or imported into the PT lexicon. 
                                                             
4
 cf. Habash (208) 
306
Furthermore, we have observed that the test set 
contained some spelling errors which have been 
corected by SmartCorect (ca. 150 mispelling 
corections were done), for example: 
offiziel => offiziel 
Sympatie => Sympathie 
enhülten => enthülten 
besseren => beseren 
unbwohnbar => unbewohnbar 
zwiwchen => zwischen 
 
Thus, for comparison purposes we translated the 
test set thre times: 
• Out-of-the-box PT, without SmartCorrect 
• Out-of-the-box PT, with SmartCorrect 
• Out-of-the-box PT, with SmartCorect plus 
lexicon adaptation 
The BLEU score in the first run was 17,0. 
Interestingly, the BLEU score of the second run 
did not reflect any improvements caused by 
corection of typos; on the contrary, it declined by 
0,2  from 17,0 to 16,8. Howevr, by maual 
evaluation of sample sentences we gained a more 
positive impresion of the results. With the third 
run, after the lexicon coding, a BLEU of 17,1, i.e. a 
minimal increase compared with the firs run, was 
achieved. Here again, the manual inspection of 
random sentences, containing the coded terms, left 
an impression of some more significant 
improvements than measured by BLEU. 
5.1 Conclusion

Automatic metrics have shown a minimal 
improvement of translation quality. However, the 
manual inspection sugested much more 
significant influences of speling corection and 
lexicon coding on the translation adequacy and 
sentence structure and consequently on the 
readability of the output than the BLEU score did. 
5.2 Combined
system submision by DFKI 
At WMT 2011 our PT wil also participate in the 
combined translation task in a combination of rule-
based and SMT systems submited by the DFKI
5
. 
 
                                                             
5
 Xu et al.(201) 
6 Outlook

Simultaneously with the curent submision a 
‘hybrid experiment’ was performed: An atempt at 
using SMT methods to improve the transfer 
selection for coding new entries in PT. 
An existing (crawled) paralel corpus in the 
automotive domain was cleaned, segmented by 
Liguatec sentence spliter, sentence-aligned by 
Hunalign (suported by using the Linguatec 
dictionary), word-aligned by GIZA+ and finally 
phrase tables were produced by using Moses. The 
objective was to extract meaningful phrases and 
their translations which are particularly suitable for 
import into the PT lexicon and thus generate a 
glossary. 
First a phrase table filter, based on frequency, 
was aplied. Then part of spech information was 
added to both source and target entries as a basis 
for filtering linguisticaly motivated phrases. A 
glossary was generated. For testing purposes a very 
smal set of about 250 terms, namely those which 
were unknown in the PT lexicon, was chosen to be 
imported. On a test corpus of about 320 sentences 
from the automotive domain the translation quality 
improvement, measured by BLEU, turned out to be 
about 3.1% (before coding: 14.87, after coding: 
17.97). 
We wil continue researching in that field. 
References 
Bogdan Babych, Anthony Hartley. 203. Improving 
Machine Translation Quality with Automatic Named 
Entity Recognition. Proc. EACL-EAMT, Budapest. 
Arendse Bernth. 192. The LMT Bok. IBM 
Deutschland Informationsysteme GmbH Scientific 
Center Institute for Logic and Linguistics. 
Nazar Habash. 208. Four techniqes for Online 
Handling of Out-of-Vocabulary Words in Arabic-
English Statistical Machine Translation. Procedings 
of ACL-08: HLT, Short Papers (Companion 
Volume), pages 57-60, Columbus, Ohio, USA. 
Roland Kaplan and Joan Bresnan. 1982. Lexical 
functional gramar: A formal system for 
gramatical representation. In Joan Bresnan (Ed.) 
The mental representation of Gramatical Relations. 
MIT Pres. 
Michael McCord. 1989. A new version of slot gramar. 
Research report RC 14506, IBM research division, 
Yorktown Heights. 
307
Michael McCord and Arendse Bernth. 192. Using Slot 
Gramar. IBM Deutschland Informationsysteme 
GmbH Scientific Center Institute for Logic and 
Linguistics. 
Gregor Thurmair. 204. Using corpus information to 
improve MT quality. In Yuste Rodrigo, Elia (ed) 
Paris: ELRA (European Language Resources 
Association): Procedings of the Third International 
Workshop on Language Resources for Translation 
Work, Reseach & Training (LR4Trans-III) 
Gregor Thurmair. 205. Improving MT Quality: 
Towards a Hybrid MT Architecture in the Linguatec 
‘Personal Translator’. International MT Sumit X, 
Phuket. Invited paper. 
Gregor Thurmair. 209. Comparing difernt 
architectures of hybrid Machine Translation systems. 
Procedings of the Twelft Machine Translation 
Sumit. Otawa, Canada. p.340-348 
Jia Xu, Xiaojun Zhang, David Vilar, Casey Kenington 
and Hans Uszkoreit. 201. The DFKI Hybrid 
Machine Translation System for WMT 201 On the 
Integration of SMT and RBMT. Submision paper 
for WMT 201 sixth workshop on statistical machine 
translation. Edinburgh. 
 
308

