Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics, pages 67–75,
Portland, Oregon, June 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
WM load influences the interpretation of refering expresions 
 
Jacolien van Rij 
University of Groningen 
J.C.van.Rij@rug.nl 
Hedderik van Rijn 
University of Groningen 
D.H.van.Rijn@rug.nl 
Petra Hendriks 
University of Groningen 
P.Hendriks@rug.nl 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper presents a study of the efect of 
working memory load on the interpretation of 
pronouns in diferent discourse contexts: sto-
ries with and without a topic shift. We present 
a computational model (in ACT-R, Anderson, 
2007) to explain how refering subjects are 
used and interpreted. We furthermore report 
on an experiment that tests predictions that 
folow from simulations. The results of the 
experiment suport the model predictions that 
WM load only afects the interpretation of 
pronouns in stories with a topic shift, but not 
in stories without a topic shift. 
1 Introduction

How do listeners interpret a potentialy ambiguous 
refering expresion? To describe a particular 
event, object or character, often diferent refering 
expresions can be used. Some refering expres-
sions are more specific than others. For example, a 
proper name such as ‘Eric’ is more specific than 
the personal pronoun ‘he’, which can refer to any 
of the male characters in a given linguistic context. 
Generaly, pronouns are used and interpreted as 
refering to the most salient character or object 
(the topic) in the linguistic context (a.o., Ariel, 
190; Gundel, Hedberg, & Zacharski, 193). In 
contrast, ful noun phrases or proper names are 
used to introduce new characters or to refer to les 
salient characters. Diferent factors have ben 
found to afect the saliency of characters or ob-
jects in the linguistic context (se Arnold, 198, 
for a review), among others the gramatical role. 
The subject of the previous sentence is likely to be 
the curent topic (Grosz, Weinstein, & Joshi, 
1995). As a result, listeners wil often interpret a 
pronoun as refering to the previous subject (a.o., 
McDonald & MacWhiney, 195; Stevenson, 
Crawley, & Kleinman, 194).  
However, for children up to the age of 7, the 
gramatical role sems to be a les important cue 
than for adults. Manipulating the discourse struc-
ture, Koster and coleagues showed that children 
interpret subject pronouns in a diferent way than 
adults do (Koster, Hoeks, & Hendriks, in pres). 
They presented adults and children with prere-
corded short stories about two characters of the 
same gender. Two types of stories were tested, 
stories with and without a topic shift. In the stories 
with topic shift the topic shifted halfway by 
changing the gramatical role of the characters 
(se Table 1): the second character becomes the 
subject of next sentences, rather than the first 
character. In al stories the final sentence started 
with a potentialy ambiguous pronoun (‘he’ or 
‘she’). 
 
Story with topic shift (+TS) 
1. Eric/gat/voetbalen/in de sporthal. 
‘Eric is going to play socer in the sports hal.’ 
2. Philip/vragt/Eric/om e te rijden/nar de training. 
‘Philip asks Eric to carpol to the training.’ 
3. Philip/halt/Eric/na het eten/met de auto op. 
‘Philip picks up Eric after diner by car.’ 
4. Hij/voetbalt/al twintig jar. 
‘He has played socer for twenty years.’ 
Story without topic shift (-TS) 
1. Eric/gat/voetbalen/in de sporthal. 
‘Eric is going to play socer in the sports hal.’ 
2. Eric/vragt/Philip/om e te rijden/nar de training. 
‘Eric asks Philip to carpol to the training.’ 
3. Eric/halt/Philip/na het eten/met de auto op. 
‘Eric picks up Philip after diner by car.’ 
4. Hij/voetbalt/al twintig jar. 
‘He has played socer for twenty years.’ 
Q Wie voetbalt al twintig jar? 
‘ho has played socer for twenty years?’ 
Table 1: Example of the Dutch sentences (and the Eng-
lish translations) of a story with and without topic shift. 
 
67
Adult listeners interpreted this pronoun as refer-
ring to the second character in stories with a topic 
shift, and as refering to the first character in sto-
ries without a topic shift. Children, on the other 
hand, did not distinguish betwen these two types 
of stories: they showed a smal preference for the 
first character as the referent of the pronoun. Kos-
ter et al. found that children with a higher auditory 
working memory capacity performed more adult-
like, which raises the question whether limited 
WM capacity causes decreased performance. 
We have implemented a cognitive model to in-
vestigate the efect of WM load on the interpreta-
tion of subject pronouns in discourse. To test the 
prediction folowing from our model that WM 
load can decrease adults’ comprehension of stories 
with a topic shift, we also performed an experi-
ment. 
2 Modeling
pronoun interpretation 
We have implemented a cognitive model within 
the cognitive architecture ACT-R (Anderson, 
2007) that can simulate both the use and interpre-
tation of refering subjects (Van Rij, Van Rijn, & 
Hendriks, submited). Here we focus on the inter-
pretation of subject pronouns.  
2.1 Computational
simulation 
To simulate the results of Koster et al. (in pres), 
the model is presented with stories of 6 sentences, 
with or without a topic shift. The stories are pro-
vided to the model word by word. During on-line 
sentence procesing the model builds a (simpli-
fied) representation of the preceding discourse: 
every character in the story is represented in the 
declarative memory. Each representation (refered 
to as “chunk”) has a certain amount of activation 
that reflects the saliency of the character in the 
curent discourse. The model determines the refer-
ent of the potentialy ambiguous pronoun in the 
final sentence, by selecting the chunk with the 
highest level of activation as the curent discourse 
topic and as the referent of the pronoun. 
Explaining children’s and adults’ performance 
In ACT-R, the activation of chunks reflects the 
chunk’s history, because activation is dependent 
on the frequency of use (the more frequently used, 
the higher the activation) and the recency of the 
last retrieval (the more recent the last retrieval, the 
higher the activation). The activation of chunks 
decays with time, but is increased when the chunk 
is retrieved. In adition to this base-level activa-
tion, spreading activation can temporarily bost 
the activation of a chunk in a particular context, 
reflecting the usefulnes of that chunk in that con-
text
1
. Chunks that are curently being procesed 
spread activation to other, conected chunks in 
declarative memory. As the amount of spreading 
activation determines the ability to maintain goal-
relevant information, diferences in spreading ac-
tivation acount for individual diferences in 
working memory capacity (Daily, Lovet, & 
Reder, 201). In our model, the subject of the pre-
vious sentence spreads activation to al discourse 
elements asociated with it. 
To explain the diference betwen children’s 
and adults’ interpretation of subject pronouns, we 
manipulated the amount of spreading-activation 
from the previous subject. If the amount of spread-
ing activation is high, the chunk representing the 
subject spreads a large amount of activation and 
discourse elements that are asociated with the 
subject become more activated in comparison with 
the other discourse elements. As a result, the 
model wil retrieve the subject of the previous sen-
tence as the curent discourse topic. However, if 
the subject spreads a smal amount of activation, 
reflecting a low WM capacity, then there wil be 
no efect on the discourse elements asociated 
with the subject. In that case, the efects of fre-
quency and recency wil be the main determinants 
of which referent is retrieved. 
Figure 1 shows the efect of WM capacity (i.e., 
the amount of spreading activation) on the activa-
tion of the two referents in the stories that were 
provided to the model. The second character, ref-
erent ‘b’, is introduced in the third sentence. The 
+TS condition starts to difer from the – TS condi-
tion in sentence 4, where the second character be-
                                                             
1
 In ACT-R the activation of chunk i is defined by: , with n being the 
number of presentations of chunk i, and t
k
 the time since the 
kth presentation, m the number of chunks that are conected 
with chunk i, W
j 
the amount of activation that is spread from 
chunk j, S
ji
 the strength of asociation betwen j and i, and ε
i
  
noise. 
The activation of a chunk determines the time it takes to re-
trieve it from declarative memory: 
€ 
T=e
−A
i
. 
68
comes the subject in the +TS stories but not the –
TS stories (cf. Koster et al., in pres). With a high 
WM capacity, the model selects the subject of the 
previous sentence as the referent of the pronoun in 
sentence 6, because this discourse element clearly 
has the highest activation (Figure 1, right). How-
ever, with a low WM capacity, the model wil 
show a much-reduced preference for the second 
character as the referent of the pronoun, and often 
choses the first character. Similarly to children’s 
performance, the models’ interpretation of pro-
nouns is not afected by gramatical role (Figure 
1, left). 
 
 
Figure 1. Mean levels of activation of the first charac-
ter (a) and the second character (b) in stories with 
(+TS) and without (-TS) a topic shift, measured at the 
end of each of 5 sentences (x-axis). In sentence 6, the 
model selects the character with the highest activation 
as the referent of the pronoun. 
 
Prediction of the model 
On the basis of these simulations we propose that 
an individual’s WM capacity determines how 
much the gramatical structure of the previous 
sentence plays a role in resolving a potentialy 
ambiguous subject pronoun. If this hypothesis is 
corect, we expect that adults show dificulties in 
detecting a topic shift when their WM is taxed by 
having to perform a memory task in paralel. This 
prediction folows directly from the ACT-R 
model: goal-relevant information spreads a pro-
portion of the total spreading activation to other 
chunks in the declarative memory. If the number 
of sources from which activation is spread in-
creases, the amount of spreading activation that is 
received by individual chunks decreases. In a high 
WM load situation, more information neds to be 
maintained in an activated state and as a result, the 
subject of the previous sentence spreads les acti-
vation to the discourse elements asociated with 
the subject. Therefore, the model predicts that 
adult listeners or readers show more child-like per-
formance in high WM load conditions: they wil 
more often select the first character as the curent 
discourse topic. In adition, the model predicts 
that it wil take more time to retrieve a discourse 
element in a high WM load condition, because the 
retrieval time is determined by the level of activa-
tion (the lower the activation, the longer it takes to 
retrieve the information).  
3 Experiment

We performed a dual-task experiment to test our 
prediction that adult listeners wil show dificulties 
with the comprehension of a topic shift if they 
have les WM capacity available. To manipulate 
WM load, participants were asked to perform a 
combined task: memorizing a sequence of digits 
for later recal and performing a moving-window 
task (Just, Carpenter, & Woley, 1982). 
3.1 Methods

Digit task 
At the start of each trial, participants were pre-
sented with a sequence of either thre or six digits 
(low and high WM load conditions) that they had 
to memorize. Digits were shown for 1 second each 
in the center of a computer scren. After complet-
ing the moving-window task, the participants re-
caled the memorized digits. The digits were 
pseudo-randomly chosen from 1 to 9, while ensur-
ing that not al the digits were the same. 
Moving-window task 
After the presentation of the digits, the moving-
window task started. In this task, participants had 
to read stories of four sentences each (se Table 
1), folowed by a comprehension question. The 
sentences were presented one by one and were 
subdivided into smaler word clusters (indicated 
by dashes in Table 1). Using a typical moving-
window paradigm (Just et al., 1982), only the let-
ters of one single word cluster were visible at a 
time. Al other leters were replaced by a dot. By 
presing a buton, the participant could move the 
69
window to the next word cluster. After reading the 
four-sentence story in this way, a question was 
presented in the center of the scren, and two an-
swer alternatives were presented in the botom 
corners of the scren. Participants had to pres the 
coresponding buton to answer the question. After 
answering the question, they had to type in the 
digits that were presented at the begining of the 
trial. 
At the end of each trial, participants only re-
ceived fedback on the digit task to ensure sufi-
cient focus on the WM task. We colected 
diferent measures per trial: the reading times per 
region, acuracy and reaction times for the ques-
tions and the number of erors in reproducing the 
digits. 
Design 
Stories. In every story two characters of the same 
gender played a role, of which the first names 
started with a diferent leter. Al names consisted 
of 4-8 characters, and two sylables. Importantly, 
the final sentence started with a subject pronoun 
hij (‘he’) or zij (‘she’) that was ambiguous: the 
pronoun could refer to both characters, so that the 
only clue to the interpretation of the pronouns was 
the structure of the story. 
We designed two variants of every test story 
(se Table 1), in which we manipulated whether 
there was a shift of topic. The topic shift is real-
ized by making the second character (‘Philip’) the 
subject of the second sentence. If there was no 
topic shift, we expected participants to prefer the 
firstly introduced character as the referent of the 
ambiguous pronoun, but if there was a topic shift, 
we expected participants to prefer the second char-
acter. At the end of every test story a question was 
presented to elicit the prefered interpretation of 
the ambiguous pronoun. 
Lists. The presented materials were part of a 
larger experiment, in which we aditionaly tested 
another two variants of every story. In total, 64 
test stories were designed in four diferent vari-
ants. Four lists of 64 test stories were constructed, 
so that every list received a diferent variant of the 
test stories and thus contained 16 test stories per 
condition. Besides the test stories, the lists also 
contained 128 filer items (the same for al lists), 
so that the lists consisted of 192 items in total. The 
filer stories had the same structure as the test sto-
ries, so 64 filer stories per condition. The filer 
stories were folowed by a question about the first 
or second sentence of the story to avoid reading 
strategies and to mask the experimental manipula-
tions. Half of the filer questions asked about one 
of the characters, the other half asked about a non-
referent (whator where-question). Note that in 
contrast to the test questions, that were designed to 
elicit an interpretational preference, filer ques-
tions were not ambiguous and could be unambigu-
ously scored as right or wrong. 
Here, we report on 2 times 32 test items, and 
the 64 filer items with the same two discourse 
structures. One test story (both variants) was re-
moved from the data, because of a technical prob-
lem during presentation. 
Procedure 
Participants were randomly asigned to one of the 
four lists. The experiment consisted of two blocks: 
a low WM load block (3 digits) and a high WM 
load block (6 digits). The order of blocks was 
counterbalanced; within blocks the items were 
randomly distributed. Participants first received 
instructions, folowed by a practice trial suited for 
the curent WM load condition. Betwen the two 
blocks participants received instructions for the 
other digit task. 
Participants 
Sixty-two first-year psychology students (17 men, 
40 women; mean age 20) participated in the ex-
periment in exchange for course credits. Five 
participants could not complete the experiment 
because of technical problems. Another 5 partici-
pants were excluded from data analysis, because 
they answered les than 75% of the filer questions 
corectly in the low WM load condition, and/or 
performed at chance level in one of the two types 
of filer questions. Data of 52 participants (15 
men, 37 women) was used for the statistical analy-
ses. 
3.2 Results

In this section we first discus the performance on 
the digit tasks, folowed by the of-line story com-
prehension results, i.e., answers on the questions 
and the related reaction times, and the self-paced 
reading data. 
70
Digit task results 
Participants made more erors on the digit-task in 
the high WM load condition than in the low WM 
load condition (percentage corect trials: 3-
digits=7.2%, 6-digits=52.0%, mean erors per 
trial: 3-digits=0.343, 6-digits=0.852), indicating 
that the 6-digit condition was inded more difi-
cult. We did not find any efect of story condition 
on the number of erors in the digit task or on the 
percentages corect trials. 
Of-line results 
Answers. Figure 2 shows the preference for either 
the first or second character as the referent of the 
ambiguous pronoun at the end of the test stories. 
 
 
Figure 2: Referent preference for stories without (-TS) 
and with (+TS) topic shift (± SE), ploted separately for 
both WM load conditions. 
 
Figure 2 shows that participants were sensitive to 
the topic-shift manipulation. In both WM load 
conditions, the expected referent was prefered 
(i.e., Referent 1 in –TS, and Referent 2 in +TS). 
We examined the efects of Topic shift, WM 
load, and Trial position, the position of the trial in 
the experiment, on the choice for the first charac-
ter (yes or no) using logistic mixed-efects models 
(cf. Bayen, 208). More complex models that 
included aditional predictors did not show quali-
tatively diferent efects. In al the presented mod-
els, participant and item (i.e., al variants of a story 
were labeled as the same item) were included as 
crosed-random efects. 
We compared diferent models using a step-
wise variable deletion procedure, starting with the 
complete interaction model. For every model 
comparison, we examined whether the diference 
in -2 log likelihod is significant, given the difer-
ence in degres of fredom using the chi-square 
distribution.  If this diference is significant, the 
reduced model has a significantly lower godnes-
of-fit, indicating that the deletion of the variable or 
interaction is not justified. As removing the 3-way 
interaction did not show a significant diference 
with the complete interaction model, we selected 
the model without this thre-way interaction as the 
baseline (or ful model). Figure 3 sumarizes the 
model comparisons performed to investigate 
whether WM load and the type of story afect the 
choice for the first character (left graph). Al two-
way interactions (Topic shift by Trial position, 
Trial position by WM load, and importantly Topic 
shift by WM load) neded to be included in the 
statistical model. 
 
 
Figure 3. Explained variance in -2 log likelihod of 
interactions compared to a ful model (se text). The 
statistical significance is calculated with a χ
2
-test (with 
1,1,1, or 3 degres of fredom respectively).  (‘*’ 
p<.05, ‘*’ p<.01, ‘**’ p<.01) 
 
The best model showed that, in stories with 
topic shift (+TS), the first character was selected 
more often in the high WM load condition than in 
the low WM load condition (β=0.84, z=3.57; 
p<.01), in line with the asumption that decreas-
ing working memory capacity reduces pronoun 
resolution performance. The model showed no 
general efect of WM load (β=0.308, z=1.10; 
p>.1). Thus, no diferential efect for WM load 
condition was found for the condition without top-
ic shift. In adition, participants were more likely 
to select the first character in stories with a topic 
shift as the experiment progresed (β=0.08, 
z=3.81; p<.01), but in the high WM load condi-
tion this efect was reduced (β=-0.05, z=-2.28; 
p=.023).  
Reaction times. In the same way as we ana-
lyzed the choice of referent, we analyzed the log-
transformed reaction times after excluding the 
short outliers (<= 50ms; les than 1% of the data). 
However, we did not find any significant interac-
tion (se Figure 3). The best fiting model, which 
71
included the main efects, but no interactions, only 
showed a significant contribution of Trial posi-
tion: Participants became faster in answering dur-
ing the experiment (β=-0.02, t=-5.97; p<.01). 
To sumarize, we found that WM load afects 
the comprehension of stories with a topic shift, but 
not the stories without a topic shift: participants 
more often select the first character as the referent 
of the ambiguous pronoun in the high WM load 
condition. However, we did not find a diference 
in reaction times betwen the two types of stories, 
sugesting that the questions after stories with a 
topic shift are not more dificult to answer. These 
findings suport our prediction that adults wil 
show dificulties in procesing a topic shift if they 
experience more WM load. 
3.3 Reading
time data 
Before analyzing the reading time data we re-
moved mising data (2%), short outliers (smaler 
than 50 ms, 19%) and used a log-transform to re-
duce the efect of the long outliers (cf. Bayen & 
Milin, 2010). The relatively large amount of short 
outliers was caused by a technical problem.  As 
the outliers were equaly distributed over the story 
conditions and the WM load conditions 
(χ
2
(1)=0.925, p>.1), it is unlikely that this influ-
ences our results in qualitative ways. 
We compared linear mixed-efects models in 
the same way as before to test the efects of Topic 
shift, WM load, and Trial position for al moving-
window regions on the log-transformed reading 
times. More complex models that included adi-
tional predictors did not show qualitatively difer-
ent efects. We found no significant 3-way or 2-
way interactions in the analyzed regions that 
neded to be included in the statistical model. We 
therefore only report on the main-efects model. 
Sentence 1. The first sentence of the story is 
identical in both variants of the stories (-TS and 
+TS). Figure 4 displays reading times of the first 
thre regions for the two working memory condi-
tions, colapsed over the two story types. The 
main-efects model showed an efect of Trial posi-
tion (participants read faster as the experiment 
progresed, β=-0.04, t=-13.0; p<.01), an efect 
of WM load (increased reading time in high WM 
condition, β=0.245, t=9.4; p<.01), but no efect 
of Topic shift (β=0.012, t=0.48; p>.1). Similar re-
sults were found for region 2. 
 
 
Figure 4. Reading times (raw data) of the first thre 
regions of sentence 1 (±SE). (English translation of an 
example sentence from Table 1) 
 
Sentence 2. In the stories with a topic shift 
(+TS), the topic shift is initiated in the second sen-
tence, by introducing a new character in subject 
position. Therefore, we would expect to se differ-
ences in reading times betwen the two story 
types. In adition, we expected to find an interac-
tion betwen WM load and Topic shift, as an early 
measure of the efect of WM load on the of-line 
data: in the high WM load condition, the previous 
subject has les influence, therefore we would ex-
pect the diference in reading times to be reduced. 
However, we did not find any significant interac-
tion. 
Figure 5 shows the normalized efects of re-
gions 1-4 of the second sentence (normalized by 
the first region). For region 1, the main efects 
model revealed that participants became faster 
over the course of the experiment (β=-0.04, t=-
12.21; p<.01). However, Topic shift (β=0.024, 
t=0.83; p>.1) and WM load (β=-0.010, t=-0.3; 
p>.1) did not contribute to the fit of the data.  
 
 
Figure 5. Normalized reading times (diference with 
region 1) of the first four regions of sentence 2 (±SE). 
(English translations of example sentences from Table 
1) 
72
For analyzing the reading times of region 2 we 
removed posible confounding efects at the be-
gining of the sentence, such as the efect of Trial 
position, by taking the diference in reading time 
betwen the second and first region.
2
 The main-
efects model for analyzing region 2 without Trial 
position showed a significant increase in reading 
time for the stories with a topic shift in compari-
son with the stories without a topic shift (β=0.085, 
t=2.79; p=0.04), indicating that participants ex-
pected to se the subject of the previous sentence 
instead of a new referent. However, there was no 
significant contribution of WM load. Analyzing 
the remaining regions of sentence 2 did not show 
an efect of Topic shift or WM load. In sentences 3 
and 4, we did not find significant efects of Topic 
shift or WM load, nor an interaction betwen these 
two factors. 
To sumarize, we found an efect of WM load 
in the first sentence and an efect of Topic shift in 
the second sentence. The longer reading times on 
the first sentence in the high WM load condition 
probably reflect some final rehearsing of the dig-
its. However, after this first sentence, no efect of 
WM load is found. 
4 Discussion

We predicted, on the basis of our cognitive model, 
that adults wil show more dificulties in process-
ing a topic shift in higher WM load conditions. 
We performed a dual-task experiment to investi-
gate this prediction. We hypothesized that as WM 
load increased, adult readers would show a sig-
nificant decrease in their preferences for the sec-
ond character as the referent of a pronoun in the 
stories with a topic shift. In adition, we expected 
an increase in reading times in stories with a topic 
shift as a result of the topic shift, but we expected 
that this increase would diminish in the high WM 
load condition. 
The of-line data suport the prediction of the 
model: participants selected the first character as 
the referent of the ambiguous pronoun signifi-
cantly more often in the high WM load condition. 
No diferences in reaction times were found, sug-
gesting that the comprehension questions were 
                                                             
2
 Analysis of the absolute reading times revealed the same 
efects. The reading times of region 1 were included in the 
analysis of the absolute reading times. 
similarly dificult to answer for the two types of 
stories. 
With respect to the reading times, we found an 
increase in reading times imediately after pre-
senting a new referent in subject position, which 
indicates that readers expected to se the subject 
of the previous sentence instead of a new referent. 
However, we did not measure a significant inter-
action betwen WM load and type of story. Dif-
ferent explanations are posible for why this 
interaction did not reach significance, contrary to 
our expectations. It could be that WM load does 
not afect the procesing of the sentence, but only 
afects the updating of the discourse representation 
with new sentence information. In that case, sen-
tence wrap-up efects could have masked the ef-
fects of WM load. An alternative explanation is 
that the moving-window task is not suited to de-
tect the efect of WM load. It is reasonable to as-
sume that the efect of WM load on the topic shift 
is spread out over diferent regions, and is thus 
more dificult to detect. ERP studies provide sup-
port for this explanation, because for unexpected 
noun phrases readers show an ERP efect 30-600 
ms after the determiner of the unexpected noun 
phrase (Oten & Van Berkum, 209), which is 
much longer than it tok participants in our ex-
periment to read one region. 
The link betwen WM capacity and language 
procesing is not new. For example, within the 
context of ACT-R, Lewis and Vasishth (205) 
have explained dificulties in sentence procesing, 
which have ben atributed to WM load, by ACT-
R’s fluctuating activation and similarity-based 
interference in the retrieval of chunks. The fluctu-
ating activation of chunks also plays a role in our 
acount of the interpretation of pronouns in dis-
course. This implementation is consistent with the 
memory acount of Foraker and McElre (207) 
that characterizes the prominence of discourse 
elements as diferences in strength of their repre-
sentations in memory (in contrast with a.o. Grosz 
et al., 195; Gundel et al., 193). Our implementa-
tion is similar to the acount of Reiter, Keler and 
More (201), who use ACT-R’s spreading acti-
vation mechanism to explain short-term priming 
of syntactical structures. In adition, to explain the 
diference betwen children’s and adults’ per-
formance, we implemented the WM theory of 
Daily, Lovet, and Reder (201), who manipulated 
the amount of spreading activation to acount for 
73
individual diferences in working memory capac-
ity on digit span tasks. 
Our acount is also in line with previously pro-
posed computational models in diferent frame-
works that explain the relation betwen WM 
capacity and language procesing, such as C 
READER (Just & Carpenter, 192), or 4CAPS 
(Just & Varma, 207). In these models, WM ca-
pacity is implemented as a limited amount of acti-
vation that is used for storage of intermediate 
results and for computation. The amount of activa-
tion is diferent for individuals. If more capacity is 
required for procesing or storage than is avail-
able, this wil result in longer procesing times or 
retrieval erors. On the basis of this theory, Dane-
man and Carpenter (1980) predicted longer read-
ing times on discourse pronouns for readers with a 
low WM capacity. In contrast, MacDonald and 
Christiansen (202) have argued against the lim-
ited capacity theory of Just and Carpenter: they 
propose instead that diferences in WM capacity 
are diferences in skil that arise from variations in 
exposure to the language, and biological difer-
ences. However, our data that shows that WM 
load can afect the interpretation of stories with a 
topic shift, is dificult to explain in terms of lan-
guage skils. 
To conclude, on the basis of earlier research 
(Koster et al., in pres) we hypothesized that lim-
ited WM capacity might cause decreased compre-
hension of stories with a topic shift. To investigate 
how WM capacity afects the comprehension of 
the discourse structure, we implemented a cogni-
tive model. Our model implied that suficient WM 
capacity is necesary for an adult-like interpreta-
tion of a potentialy ambiguous subject pronoun. 
With suficient WM capacity, information about 
the gramatical roles of the referents in the previ-
ous sentence determines the interpretation of the 
ambiguous pronoun, but readers or listeners with-
out suficient WM capacity rely more on the base 
level activation of discourse elements. To test 
whether adults’ performance would decrease when 
their WM is taxed, we performed a dual-task ex-
periment in which we manipulated the WM load. 
The results confirmed that with higher  load, 
adults are les likely to distinguish betwen stories 
with and without a topic shift, similarly to chil-
dren. Thus WM load can afect the interpretation 
of ambiguous subject pronouns. 
References 
Anderson, J. R. (207). How Can the Human Mind 
Ocur in the Physical Universe? New York: Oxford 
University Pres, USA. 
Ariel, M. (190). Acesing Noun-Phrase Antecedents. 
London: Routledge. 
Arnold, J. E. (198). Reference Form and Discourse 
Paterns. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Stanford 
University. 
Bayen, R. H. (208). Analyzing Linguistic Data: A 
Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R: 
Cambridge University Pres. 
Bayen, R. H., & Milin, P. (2010). Analyzing Reaction 
Times. International Journal of Psychological 
Research, 3(2), 12-28. 
Daily, L. Z., Lovet, M. C., & Reder, L. M. (201). 
Modeling individual diferences in working memory 
performance: A source activation acount. Cognitive 
Science, 25(3), 315. 
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). Individual 
diferences in working memory and reading. Journal 
of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 19(4), 450-
466. 
Foraker, S., & McElre, B. (207). The role of 
prominence in pronoun resolution: Active versus 
pasive representations. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 56(3), 357-383. 
Grosz, B. J., Weinstein, S., & Joshi, A. K. (195). 
Centering: a framework for modeling the local 
coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 
21(2), 203-225. 
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (193). 
Cognitive status and the form of refering 
expresions in discourse. Language, 69(2), 274-307. 
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (192). A capacity 
theory of comprehension: Individual diferences in 
working memory. Psychological Review, 9(1), 12-
149. 
Just, M. A., Carpenter, P. A., & Woley, J. D. (1982). 
Paradigms and proceses in reading comprehension. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 11(2), 28-
238. 
Just, M. A., & Varma, S. (207). The organization of 
thinking: What functional brain imaging reveals 
about the neuroarchitecture of complex cognition. 
Cognitive, Afective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 
7(3), 153-191. 
74
Koster, C., Hoeks, J., & Hendriks, P. (in pres). 
Comprehension and production of subject pronouns: 
Evidence for the asymetry of gramar. In A. 
Grim, A. Müler, C. Haman & E. Ruigendijk 
(Eds.), Production-comprehension asymetries in 
child language. Berlin: De Gruyter. 
Lewis, R. L., & Vasishth, S. (205). An activation-
based model of sentence procesing as skiled 
memory retrieval. Cognitive Science, 29(3), 375-
419. 
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. H. (202). 
Reasesing working memory: Coment on Just and 
Carpenter (192) and Waters and Caplan (196). 
Psychological Review, 109(1), 35-54. 
McDonald, J. L., & MacWhiney, B. (195). The time 
course of anaphor resolution: Efects of implicit verb 
causality and gender. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 34(4), 543-566. 
Oten, M., & Van Berkum, J. J. A. (209). Does 
working memory capacity afect the ability to 
predict upcoming words in discourse? Brain 
research, 1291, 92-101. 
Reiter, D., Keler, F., & More, J. D. (201). A 
Computational Cognitive Model of Syntactic 
Priming. Cognitive Science, 35. 
Stevenson, R. J., Crawley, R. A., & Kleinman, D. 
(194). Thematic roles, focus and the representation 
of events. Language and Cognitive Proceses, 9(4), 
519-548. 
Van Rij, J., Van Rijn, H., & Hendriks, P. (submited). 
Production and comprehension of refering subjects: 
A computational model of the interaction betwen 
linguistic and cognitive constraints. 
 
 
75

