Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Speech and Language Processing for Assistive Technologies, pages 94–100,
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, July 30, 2011. c©2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
What does it mean to comunicate (not) emotionaly? 
 
Jan-Oliver Wülfing 
Fraunhofer Centre Birlinghoven IZB 
Schloß Birlinghoven 
D-53754 Sankt Augustin 
jan-oliver.wuelfing 
@izb.fraunhofer.de 
Lisa Hoffmann 
Fraunhofer Institute for 
Applied Information Technology FIT 
Schloß Birlinghoven 
D-53754 Sankt Augustin 
lisa.hoffmann@fit.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
Abstract 
Comunication is an esential part of our life. 
Though, not only comunication is the key – 
it is all about emotional (prosodic) 
comunication. Due to empirical research, 
people, who are augmentative communicators 
and speak with a voice output comunication 
aid, want to express their emotions in the 
same way as everybody else – it is one of their 
deepest interests (Portnuff, 206; Hoffman 
and Wülfing, 2010). So far, curent devices 
lack the oportunity of emotional utterances. 
This circumstance leads not only to a huge 
usability deficit, but furthermore, it is an 
obstacle to develop emotional competence and 
to behave as well as regulate one´s emotion 
adequately (Blackstone and Wilkins, 209). 
This article aims to increase the sensitivity for 
the importance of emotional comunication. 
Furthermore, it tries to give first sugestions 
for implementing an usable device that 
suports users with a voice output 
comunication aid to express emotional 
utterances. This could be done by using 
phrase-generation, as mentiond by 
Vanderheyden and Penigton (1998). 
1 Introduction

One can hardly imagine how it would be to 
comunicate without an emotional output. If we 
talk to each other, every conversation is influenced 
by our emotions. Sometimes we want to hide our 
feelings; however, more often we want to send an 
underlying mesage with our prosodic uterance. 
For example, imagine someone goes for a walk 
with their best friend, the sun is shining and the 
birds are chirping – this kind of situation and the 
feeling it evokes wil probably be reflected by their 
prosodic utterance: “Dude, it`s awesome weather 
today!” Or imagine furthermore, the same person 
gets into a fight with this friend while walking in 
the sun; it certainly must not be pointed out that the 
emotion and therefore the reaction would differ. 
Though, comunication and emotion seem 
inevitably asociated, it is still not posible for 
people with complex communication needs to talk 
emotionally, since curent voice output 
comunication aids (VOCA) do not ofer prosodic 
spech output. A circumstance that leads to several 
drawbacks; starting with disadvantages in social 
and academic arrangements. 
1.1 What
is a prosodic uterance? 
Prosodic uterances are the key for daily 
comunication processes. They depend on the 
emotion, i.e. it is reflected by an uterance through 
the pitch, the rhythm, and the volume of the voice. 
These diferences are caled prosody and, hence, it 
is posible to expres very different types of 
emotions. Prosodic uterances influence the 
behaviour of the listener (Strom, 198). The one 
and the same uterance can difer in their meaning. 
A god example of this is irony or subtle 
utterances. They may or may not be serious 
depending also on their prosodic features.  Either 
way, the listener is going to react and this reaction 
relies not only on the acurate comprehension but 
also on the prosody of the speaker´s intended 
utterance (Batachi et al., 1997). In the case of 
augmentative comunicators and their use of a 
94
VOCA, these aspects are not fuly fulfiled. Instead 
of underlining their utterances with one or more 
prosodic features in order to convey their emotions 
to the listener, they must transcribe their curent 
emotion in text input of the VOCA. In turn, the 
VOCA renders this in a monotonic, mostly 
synthetic voice output, which leads to two 
objections: 
Firstly, the listener misinterprets the augmented 
comunicator´s uterance, which may have 
dramaticaly efects for a follow-up conversation. 
Secondly, the listener becomes just bored and the 
conversation does not last long. In both ways, the 
augmented comunicator´s situation becomes 
worse, since it influences their social environments 
and, thus, themselves (Balandin, 205). 
2 Emotional
competence as a 
pre-condition for social participation 
Emotions are sen to be an esential factor of 
social comunication. To be a part of social 
relationships, it is necesary to develop emotional 
competence in some kind. Janke (208) postulates 
emotional competence as the ability to express and 
regulate the own emotions and, furthermore, it 
describes the ability to understand emotions – the 
own one´s and other one´s. However, without the 
possibility to talk emotionaly, it is hard to develop 
emotional competence. Research, in fact, has 
shown that users of a VOCA often have deficits in 
this area which leads to dificulties in forming 
relationships and the adequate emotion regulation 
is influenced as well (Brinton and Fujiki, 209; 
Blackstone and Wilkins, 209). Furthermore, there 
is a significant corelation betwen children´s 
emotional knowledge and the degree of peer 
popularity (Janke, 2008). Brinton and Fujiki (2009) 
even sugest that emotional competence has 
impact on academic learning. Due to the fact that 
the development of emotional competence is 
learned in day-to-day interactions with other 
people and that emotional utterances are a 
necesary pre-condition for exactly these 
interactions, it becomes clear that the development 
of a VOCA which does support prosodic 
comunication would be an important factor for 
increasing the user´s Quality of Life. Among other 
things, it includes warm interpersonal relationships     
and academic achievements. 
2.1 Development
of social behaviour 
Recent psychological theories focus on mutual-
information procesing systems for explaining 
social behaviour. Strack and Deutsch (204) 
postulate two determinants to guide one´s decision
making: the reflective and the impulsive system. 
Though, both systems are interacting, they are 
diferent in their characteristics and functioning. 
The reflecting system is rather rational; it includes 
knowledge about facts and (social) values on 
which it bases its decision. The impulsive system, 
on the other hand, is lacking rational reasoning. It 
is rather impulsive, quick, and affected by 
motivational factors. Whereas the impulsive 
system is part of every decision making proces, 
the reflective system is not. As, for instance, it 
needs more cognitive resources while operating 
and is easily disturbed.  
When transfering the model onto emotional 
procesing and electronic communication aids, it 
appears that alternative comunicators are 
challenged in both, the impulsive and the reflective 
system. By definition, emotions are impulsive, 
quick, and the decisions based on them are often 
lacking rational reason. Thus, most of the time, 
emotional behaviour is driven by the impulsive 
system. Due to slow input-rates, users of a VOCA, 
inded, are not able to comunicate their emotions 
quickly and impulsively. They have to rely on the 
reflecting system. In some cases one might argue 
that this is the better oportunity as impulsive 
emotional uterances are regretted at times. On that 
account children learn that in some situations it is 
important to not follow their (inapropriate) 
impulsive behaviour while growing up (Blackstone 
and Wilkins, 209). But due to the fact that 
alternative comunicators are often disadvantaged 
in developing apropriate emotional behaviour 
(Brinton and Fujiki, 209; Blackstone and Wilkins, 
2009), it is also dificult to provide an adequate 
basis of knowledge for the reflective system. Thus, 
in particular for children, is important to 
comunicate impulsively as it also strengthens the 
ability to make rational choices. Taking Strack´ 
and Deutsch´s theory (204) into account it 
becomes clear that for the purpose of impulsive 
reactions an intended prosodic VOCA requires a 
possibility for a fast input-rate. 
 
95
 
 
 
 
3 Usability
deficits 
Empirical research in Usability Enginering shows 
that users of a VOCA claim for emotional 
comunication (Hofmann and Wülfing, 2010). 
Though, they typically honour the prospects given 
by the devices, they still describe the missing 
opportunity to talk emotionaly (Portnuff, 2006; 
Hofman and Wülfing, 2010). If we take 
Maslow´s (1970) ‘Hierarchy of Neds’ into 
account, it is indeed not surprising that people, 
who have complex comunication neds, want to 
talk in a very normal way. Maslow´s purpose is to 
show that every human being has specific neds. 
These neds are ordered hierarchicaly. The lowest 
frame depicts physiological neds like nutrition, 
sex, and the activity of the autonomous nervous 
system which are mostly involuntary (e.g. 
breathing). Then, the next layer symbolises all the 
aspects of safety. If these needs are fulfiled, it 
comes to friendship and love needs, those include 
emotional talk, social relationships, and emotional 
competence. His hierarchy underlines the 
assumption that a comunication without prosody 
is aceptable but not satisfying, since emotional 
talk is an esential factor for being part of social 
relationships. Here, we go one step forward, 
because if we say that a product must be usable as 
 
 
 
 
 
described in ISO 9241-11 (1998), it must also be 
satisfying. The ISO standard defines Usability as: 
“The extent to which a product can be used by 
specified users to achieve specified goals with 
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a 
specified context of use.” The efectiveness means 
the acuracy in achieving the specific goal. 
Efficiency is time and efort the user neds for the 
achievement. And, satisfaction is the positive 
attitude towards the system. The three aspects are 
arranged hierarchically as shown in figure 2. 
Taking this definition into acount and extending it 
on electronic communication aids, it becomes clear 
that the missing posibility for emotional 
communication can not only be sen as a 
satisfactory-failure but also as an effective-failure: 
the user is not able to achieve their goal acurately. 
Imagine, for instance, a human being canot move 
because they have a significant impairment.  The 
person is siting in a whelchair in one corner of a 
room and has a VOCA mounted on the whelchair. 
Via the device the user asks the people in the rom 
to move their chair, however, no one listens and 
helps due to the monotonous voice. In this scenario 
the VOCA fails and the user is not able to achieve 
their goal. The device, therefore, is not effective. 
But would this hapen if the VOCA would have a 
prosodic voice output? We believe that this would 
Fig. 1: The origin of prosodic utterances  which reflects the emotional state.  Internal and external 
factors have both influence on the emotion and cognition development as well as on the 
utterance itself. 
96
not happen. With a prosodic voice it is possible to 
get atention more easily. In a normal situation, if 
we could use our voice, we would rather become 
angry more and more if no one listens to us. Our 
cadence would unveil our emotion (Scherer and 
Banse, 191) and, hence, would underline our 
intention. For augmented comunicators, this 
would be an important step forward to not only 
comunicate the semantic content of their 
utterances, but also the emotion underlying those. 
The actual relevance of the made-up scenario 
above is also suported by VOCA user Colin 
Portnuf. He claimed in a speech, given in 2006, a 
device capable of shouting to gain atention in 
certain situations (Portnuf, 206). 
 
Fig. 2: Hierarchical steps of Usability based on 
 ISO 9241-11 (1998) 
 
 
 
The elimination of the uability deficit described 
above would also strengthen the user´s position in 
a comunication and most likely the duration of a 
comunication. We al love more to talk to people 
whose voice contains prosodic features than to face 
anyone whose voice is rather monotonous. Due to 
the fact that human beings are empathic, we like to 
have an impresion of the opposite´s emotion. And 
how do we get such an impresion? Through the 
mimic, gesture, and the tone of voice. So, an 
emotional device is a Win-Win situation: The 
listener can respond adequately and the speaker 
can express his intention through a verbal prosodic 
utterance. It becomes clear that even from the 
listener´s point of view it is easier and more 
comfortable to have a conversation with an 
augmented comunicator who has a prosodic 
VOCA, since it would fulfil at least some 
constraints of a fluent conversation (Todman and 
Alm, 203). Or as Colin Portnuf (206) puts it: 
“And when you help someone comunicate, you 
are not just helping that person, but all the people 
with whom he or she interacts.“ 
4 Often
heard criticism 
Often heard criticism about a prosodic speech 
output of a VOCA typicaly embraces the 
folowing thre aspects: 
a. Emotional conversation would increase the 
input rate,  
b. emotional utterances are not possible 
without a synthetic voice that suports 
emotional output and 
c. emotions and emotional conversations are 
too complex to work on a VOCA. 
Even though these aspects are not to be dismised, 
we asume that it is posible to find proper 
solutions for each of them. 
a. Increasing input rate: The spech generic 
device of a VOCA with a specific prosodic tol 
should enable the possibility of an emotional 
conversation without increasing the input time. 
Instead, emotional uterances wil extend the 
duration of a conversation. So far augmentative 
comunicators use their VOCA often to 
comunicate comon needs as “I´m hungry” or to 
answer simple yes-/no-questions (Blackstone and 
Wilkins, 209). Lasting conversations as for 
example talking about a film watched just before at 
a cinema and the experienced emotions while 
doing so are rather rare. In the later kind of 
conversations emotional uterances are very 
important, since a lack of them would shorten a 
conversation dramatically. Also one can guess that 
the user´s ned to have an emotional equipped 
VOCA is higher than the expense of one more 
additional keystroke. Nevertheless it is important 
to kep any aditional efort to the lowest to truly 
fulfil the user´s requirements. However, the 
mising lasting conversations are to be sen as a 
gap in the Quality of Life. In order to bridge this 
gap along with the gaps mentioned above (e.g. the 
mising emotional competence and Usability 
deficits) the development of a VOCA, that does 
suport prosodic comunication, seems inevitable. 
b. Synthetic voice: Starting with a prototype of 
VOCA, the emotional uterances can easily be 
pronounced naturaly instead of using synthesized 
97
spech, since emotional spech is rather limited in 
curent VOCAs (Higinbotham, 2010). 
Nonetheles, there has ben some notable eforts in 
recent years (e.g. CereProc Ltd.
1
). They make use 
of what they cal ‘Emotional Continum’. It is 
possible to simulate a wide range of underlying 
emotions of the voice. Or, if we lok at the work of 
the World Wide Web Consortium, they currently 
work on the EmotionML (201) which should 
facilitate synthetic voices to become anotated 
with emotional tags. So, it is to asume that in the 
near future emotional synthetic utterances wil be 
possible. In the meantime, however, a natural 
recorded voice of an actor is an aceptable solution 
as curent existing synthetic voices are often 
experienced as alien (Hofman and Wülfing, 
2010). Furthermore, user experience shows some 
people find it dificult to listen to the same 
intonations given by the devices while the meaning 
of the words change (Portnuf, 206), a problem 
that can be solved by using natural voice output.  
c. Complexity: In order to limit the complexity of 
such a formation, it is necessary to start with 
isolating a reasonable amount of emotions. It is 
also important to not use indiferent emotions, as 
for example cold anger and panic fear, as people 
seem to have problems distinguishing them (Banse 
and Scherer, 196) which may lead to frustration 
in conversations later on. The thre emotions 
happines, anger, and sadnes are quite diferent in 
their prosody. Thus, a listener can recognise them 
very wel, as Burkhardt (2001) mentioned. They 
belong to the so-called basic emotions as well 
(Ekman, 199). Therefore, it sems to be a 
reasonable choice to chose them for a start-up 
project. Another possibility to lower the 
complexity is to attach the emotions to certain 
situations; this restricts the context of uterances. 
5 Initial
approaches 
The proposed project aims at a spontaneous 
emotional comunication in context-specific 
situations for VOCA users. This includes the idea 
of identifying a user-specific and context-specific 
vocabulary based on phrase-generation. As shown 
above there are certain requirements for an 
authentic emotional comunication: Any 
emotional uterance consists of its semantic 
                                                             
1
 www.cereproc.com (acesed 06/24/2011) 
content, its prosodic characteristic, and a certain 
degre of impulsivenes. The presented initial 
approaches keep these requirements in mind as 
wel as the beforehand mentioned criticism. It is 
important to note that these initial aproaches are 
first propositions which are based on current 
knowledge. Posibly some adjustments ned to be 
made in the development of the prosodic VOCA in 
order to keep the device truly usable. 
Yet, based on curent experiences we propose a 
system where users firstly select their emotion and 
secondly compose the prosodic utterance, since the 
emotion does typically not change after each 
utterance. Thus, the user does not need to change 
the prosodic filter option every time. In this way, 
the input-rate wil not enhance unecessarily as 
often criticised. To render the posibility of 
impulsive, spontaneous, and agile comunication, 
the prosodic VOCA neds to suport the user with 
a sample of potential uterances fiting the user´s 
emotion in the specific situation. Therefore, the 
development of a phrased-based vocabulary is 
necessary. It is important to guarante the validity 
of the possible utterances given by the device as 
otherwise they wil not be perceived authentic. 
That is why the potential samples of utterances 
must not be chosen at random. Instead they should 
be based on empirical setings. This will be done 
by investigating specific contexts and identifying 
emotional phrases given by a specific 
subpopulation. The probability enhances that the 
device offers the user an utterance which he or she 
actually needs in the specific situation by using 
empirical based methods. The established 
vocabulary should be user-specific by al means. 
There are age-based diferences in the way people 
speak and express their emotions. A user-specific 
vocabulary needs to keep these age-diferences in 
mind for identifying phrases that fit the 
phraseology of specific users. Therefore, the 
sample of potential uterances should also be based 
on colloquial speech. This is a god example in 
order to enrich a conversation more lively and 
ongoing. In particular, colloquial speech enables 
the augmentative comunicators to be perceived 
more authentic by their social environment. It also 
suports the user in developing emotional 
competence using impulsive spech. In turn the 
environment´s feedback increases the adequate  
98
 
 
 
handling of emotions in specific situations (s. Fig. 
3). In addition to the possibility of using the 
utterances given by the device the user stil needs 
the alternative to form contents individually. A 
prosodic VOCA does not aim at depriving the 
users of the power to speak independently. It rather 
serves as an adequate suport in order to enhance 
the promptnes of a statement which is an 
important requirement for an authentic 
conversation. As already mentioned, natural 
recorded voices could be used for the potential 
utterances as an alternative to synthetic speech 
output. However, it is important to note that the 
utterances must resemble the appropriate prosody. 
Hence, the pitch, the rhythm, and the volume of the 
voice need to fit the content of the utterance. 
Sorow e.g. should be presented rather quiet while 
enragement requires a higher sound level.  
All things considered, it becomes clear that the 
development of a prosodic VOCA goes along with 
some important requirements that reflect the user´s 
needs. In order to develop a device, which supports 
these neds, the Usability has to be sen as an 
essential factor. Thus, it is important to include the 
user throughout the whole proces of developing. 
A constraint for designing usable devices that fit 
the Usability definition is the ISO standard 9241-
11 (1998). This kind of Usability-Seting include 
interviews with users and when indicated a 
monitoring with a ‘Thinking aloud-‘method, which 
helps to formalise specific usability problems with 
the specific system in that specific context. 
 
 
 
Sumarised, the requirements for a prosodic 
VOCA should be based on: 
• phrase-generation  
• specific contexts 
• appropriate emotions 
• user-specific phraseology 
• adequate prosody 
• usability standards 
To validate these and aditional asumptions for a 
specific sample of users, they must be confirmed in 
an emprical setting. A frist step was done by 
showing the importance of emotional utterances 
for augmented comunicators (Hoffman and 
Wülfing, 2010). 
6 Conclusion

Emotional comunication is an esential part of 
everyday life this is true for people with and 
without disabilities. Lacking the oportunity of 
talking emotional means to mis out many aspects 
of a fulfiling life, since emotional output has an 
enormous impact on social relationships, the 
developing of emotional competence, and even on 
academic achievements. Furthermore, this 
circumstance leads to a huge usability deficit. 
Augmented comunicators´ own expresivenes 
of emotions by gesture and miic means is limited 
and prosodic comunication is not posible, yet. 
Precisely because, prosodic VOCA is a real 
Fig. 3: Model of emotional comunication using a prosodic Voice Output Comunication Aid which 
allows the listener an apropriate emotional response to the speaker`s (augmented comunicator) 
intented mesage. 
99
innovation. It gives people with complex 
comunications needs the opportunity to expres 
themselves emotionally. It would encourage their 
participation in social life and, thus, also their 
Quality of Life. Stil, there is a lot of criticism 
involving this topic, however, with adequate 
methods and ideas it does sem posible that some 
day in the future users of a VOCA wil be able to 
comunicate emotionally. 
References 
Susan Balandin (205). Ageing and AC: Start early, 
age well! In Jens Boenisch and Karin Otto (eds.), 
Leben im Dialog – Unterstützte Komunikation über 
die gesamte Lebensspanne (46-478). Von Loeper, 
Karlsruhe. 
 
Marco W. Batachi, Thomas Suslow, and Margherita 
Rena (197). Emotion & Sprache – Zur Definition 
der Emotion und ihren Beziehungen zu kognitiven 
Prozesen, dem Gedächtnis und der Sprache. Peter 
Lang, Frankfurt a.M. 
 
Rainer Banse and Klaus R. Scherer (196). Acoustic 
profiles in vocal emotion expresion. In: Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 70(3), 614-636. 
 
Sarah W. Blackstone and David P. Wilkins (209). 
Exploring the Importance of Emotional Competence 
in Children With Complex Comunication Neds. 
In: Perspectives on Augmentative and Alternative 
Comunication, 18, 78-87. 
 
Felix Burkhardt (201). Simulation emotionaler 
Sprechweise mit Sprachsyntheseverfahren. In: Reihe 
Berichte aus der Komunikationstechnik. Shaker, 
Aachen. 
 
Bonie Brinton and Martin Fujiki (209). Meet me 
more than half way: Emotional competence in 
conversation using AC. In: Perspectives on 
Augmentative and Alternative Comunication, 18, 
73-77. 
 
Paul Ekman (199). Basic Emotions. In: Tim Dalgleish 
and Mick Power (Eds.), Handbok of Cognition and 
Emotion. John Wiley & Sons, Susex, U.K. 
 
Emotion Markup Language 1.0 (201) W3C working 
draft. http:/ww.3.org/TR/2011/D-emotionml-
20110407/ (acesed 06/24/201). 
 
 
Jefrey Higinbotham (2010). Humanizing Vox 
Artificialis: The Role of Spech Synthesis in 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication. In: 
John Mulenix and Steven Stern (Eds.), Computer 
Synthesized Spech Technologies – Tools for Aiding 
Impairment (50-70). IGI Global, Hershey, PA. 
 
Lisa Hofman and Jan-O. Wülfing (2010). Usability of 
Electronic Comunication Aids in the Light of Daily 
Use. In: Procedings of the 14th Bienial Conference 
of the International Society for Augmentative and 
Alternative Comunication (259). Barcelona, Spain 
 
ISO 9241-11 (1998). Ergonomic requirements for ofice 
work with visual display terminals (VDTs) – Part 1: 
Guidance on usability. 
 
Betina Janke (208). Emotionswisen und 
Sozialkompetenz von Kindern im Alter von drei bis 
zehn Jahren. In: Empirische Pädagogik, 2(2), 127-
144. 
 
Abraham H. Maslow (1970). Motivation and 
Personality. Harper & Row, New York, NY. 
 
Colin Portnuf (206). AC: A user´s perspective. 
Webcast available as part of the AC-RERC 
Webcast Series. http:/ac-rerc.psu.edu/index-
8121.php.html (acesed 03/30/2011). 
 
Klaus R. Scherer, Rainer Banse, Harald G. Walbot, 
and Thomas Goldbeck (191). Vocal Cues in 
Emotion Encoding and Decoding. In: Motivation and 
Emotion, 15(2), 123-148. 
 
Fritz Strack and Roland Deutsch (204). Reflective and 
Impulsive Determinants of Social Behavior. In: 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8(3), 
220-247. 
 
Volker F. Strom (198). Automatische Erkenung von 
Satzmodus, Akzentuierung und Phrasengrenzen. PhD 
thesis, University of Bon. 
 
John Todman and Norman Alm (203). Modeling 
conversational pragmatics in comunications aids. 
In: Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 523-538. 
 
Peter B. Vanderheyden and Christopher A. Penigton 
(1998). An Augmentative Communication Interface 
Based on Conversational Schemata. In: Vibhu O. 
Mital, Holy A. Yanco, John Aronis, Richard C. 
Simpson and Richard Simpson (Eds.): Asistive 
Technology and AI, LNAI 1458, 109-125. 
100

