Corpus-Based Approach for Nominal Compound Analysis for Korean Based on Linguistic and Statistical Information Juntae Yoon* jtyoon@linc.cis.upenn.edu IRCS Univ.
of Pennsylvania Philladelphia, PA 19104~ USA Key-Sun Choi kschoi@world.kaist.ac.kr KORTERM Dept.
of Computer Science KAIST~ Taejon 305-701~ Korea Mansuk Song mssong@december.yonsei.ac.kr Dept.
of Computer Science Yonsei Univ.
Seoul 120-749, Korea Abstract Accurate nominal compound analysis is crucial for in application of natural language processing such as information retrieval and extraction as well as nominal compound interpretation.
I,n the nominal compound analysis area, some corpus-based approaches have reported successful results by using statistal cooccurrences of nouns.
But a nominal compound often has the similar structure to a simple sentence, e.g. the complement-predicate structure, as well as representing compound meaning with several nouns combined.
Due to the grammarical characteristics of nominal compounds, the fi'amework based only on statistcal association between nouns often fails to analyze their structures accurately, especially in Korean.
This pcper presents a new model for Korean nominal compound analysis on the basis of linguistic and statistical knowledge.
The syntactic relations often have an effect on determining the structure of nominal compounds, and we analyzed 40 million word corpus in order to acquire syntactic and s-tatistical knowledge.
The structure of a nominal compound is analyzed based on the linguistic lexical information extracted.
By experiments, it is shown that our method is effective for accurate analysis of Korean nominal compounds.
1 Introduction
Nominal compound analysis is one of crucial issues that have been continuously studied by computational and theoretical linguists.
Many linguists have dealt with nonlinal compounds in view of semantic interpretation, and tried to explain how nominal compounds are semantiThis work was partially supported by a KOSEF's postdoctoral fellowship grant.
cally interpreted (Levi, 1978; Selkirk, 1982).
In the field of natural language processing, various computational models have been established for syntactic analysis and semantic interpretation of nominal compounds (Finin, 1980; McDonald, 1982; Arens ct aal., 1987; Pustejovsky et aal., 1993; Kobayasi et aal., 1994; Vanderwerde, 1994; Lauer, 1995).
Recently it has been shown that noun phrase analysis is effecrive for the improvement of the application of natural language processing such as information retrieval (Zhai, 1997).
Parsing nominal compound is a basic step for ~11 problems related to it.
From a bracketing point of view, structural ambiguity is also a main problem in nominal compomld analysis like in other parsing problems.
Re(:ent works have shown that the corpus-b;~sed approach for nominal compound analysis makes a good result to resolve the ambiguities (Fustcjovsky et aal., 1993; Kobayasi et aal., 1994; Lauer, 1995; Zhai, 1997).
Lauer (1995) has compared two diffbrent models of corpus-based approaches fbr nominal compound analysis.
One was called as the adjacency model which was inspired by (Pustejovsky et aal., 1993), and the other was referred to as the dependency model which was presented by Kobayasi ~t al.
(1994) 2 and Lauer (t995).
Given a nominal compound of three nouns n~'-.2'a:~, let A.s. t)e a metric used to evaluate the association of two nouns.
In the adjacency model, if A.~(',,l:',J.2) > A.s(n2,n3), then the structure is determined as (('hi 'n2) n3).
Otherwise, ('nl (',l,~ 'n:,)).
On the other hand, in 2In their work, the structure is determined l)y comparing the multiplication of the ~ssociations between all two nOuns, that is, by comImring A,s('..t, 'n2)A.s(n2, n3) and AS(nl, n3) As (n2, ',l.:~).
It m~tkes similar results to the dependency model.
292 tim dClmn(h,,ncy model, the decision is det)endent on the association strength of nt for 'rt2 and ',,::.
That is.
the left branching tree ((at 'n2) ha) is constructed it" A.s(nt,'u2) > As(at,ha), and I:he right branching tree ('nL (n2 'ha)) is made, ~M,,,rwise.
Lauer (1995) has claimed that the ~h',lmndency model makes intuitive sense and i)r~)duces t)(,,tter results.
In this paper, we propose a new model tbr ~)minal comt)ound analysis on the basis of w()rd (:o-()(:cui'ren(;(?s and grannnatical relati(mshil)s ilnmanent in nominal (:ompounds.
Tim grammatical relation can sometimes ma,k(,, the (tisnmbiguation more precise as wo, ll as it gives a clue of the nonfinal inl.(Ul)r('Iation.
For example, in the nominal (:~nnl)ound "KYEONG JAENG (competition) YUBALa(bringing about) CHEJE(system)" whi(:h meallS system to bring about competition, tim nominal conlpound "KYEONGJAENG Cl-tEJE((:oml)etition system)" co-occurs much more fl'equently titan "KYEONGJAENG YUBAL(bringing about competition)".
Howo.w;r, its structure is selected to be \[\[KYEONG-.IAENG YUBAL\] CHEJE\].
Why it is analyzed in such a way can be shown easily by transli)rming the nominal compound to the clause.
Because "YUBAL(bringing about)" is the predicatiw,, noun that derives the verb with the 1)redicative suffix attached, the modifying noun phrase can be transformed to the corresponding VP which has the meaning of "to bring about competition" (Figure 1).
The verb "YUBALHA-NEUN(to bring about)" in VP takes the "KYEONG,lAENG(competition)" as the ob.iect.
The predicative noun "YUBAL(bringing about)" also subcategorizes a noun phrase "KYEONGJAENG(competition)" in the same rammer as the verb.
In the right syntactic tree of Figure 1, it should be noted that the object of a verb does not have the dependency,elation to the noun outside the maximal 1)rojection of its head, VP.
Likewise, the object "KYE()NGJAENG(competition)" does not have a,ny dependency with the other noun over the predicative noun "YUBAL(bringing a,t)out)".
:WUBAL is a noun in Korean which means to cause t,o bring about something 2 Structure of Nominal Compound There is not any adjective derivation in Korean.
Rather, a noun itself plays an adverbial or adjective role ill a nominal compound, or modifies other noun with possessive postposition attached.
Table 1 shows various relations occurred in nominal compounds.
As shown in the example, there is a relationship between two nouns which have dependency relation in a nominal compound.
For instance, the first nominal compound in the example expresses compound meaning of individual nouns, i.e. the attribute that a .file has.
On the other hand, in the example (c) of the example, the noun "GAENYEOM(concept)" is the object of the predicative noun "GUBUN(discrimination)".
A nominal compound, as such, often has the similar structure to a simple sentence, e.g. complement-predicate structure, as well as representing compound meaning with several nouns combined.
Many researchers have tried to explain constraints given in tile process of word combination and the principle of semantic composition.
Levi (1978) has tried to find the semantic constraints which govern the combination of each noun in a nominal compound.
Sproat (1985) has taken into consideration the predicate-argument relation of nominals on the basis of generative syntax.
He explained that the nominalization suffix nominalizes the syntactic category of a verb, but 0 role of the verb is percolated into its parent node.
We claim that the nominalization is the phenomenon occurred at the syntactic level, and hence the syntactic relations should be reflected in nominal parsing.
Namely, tbr accurate nominal compound parsing, we need syntactic knowledge about nominal compound in addition to lexical information about lexical selection.
We propose a nominal parsing model based on two relations, which can be immediately applied to nominal interpretation.
We classi(y the syntactic relations in a nominal compound as tbllows: modifier-head relation One noun (adnominal, adjective) adds n certain meaning to the other noun (head) producing a compound meaning (1, 2 in Table 1).
complement-predicate relation One is the 293 NP NP NP NP," .... -__.
VP NP _~_ CHFF.JE,' ~ CHEJE . (system) .''--.
(system) ---..," NP(obj) NP .-~ ......
~4 P(obj\] ....
V" :'?2z-z.~ t /' KYEONGJAENG YUBAL I t q0 KYEONGJAENG YUBAL, ~ (competition) (bringing about) / '.
subj (competition) (bringing about),' Figure 1: Example shows that syntactic relations have influence on deternfining the structure of a nominal compound nominal compound meaning PA'IL(file) SOGSEONG(attribule) GIBON(basis) GAENYEOM(concept) GAENYEOM(concept) GUBUN (discrimination) DAETONGRYEONG(president) DANGSEON(being elected) GONGDONG (working together) BEONYEOG(translation) file attribute basic concept discrimination of concept being elected to president to translate together Table 1: Role of modifying noun in nominal compomM complement (subject, object, adverb) of the other noun (predicative noun) in a nominalcompound (3, 4, 5 in Table 1).
When considering the complementpredicate relation, we can figure out some syntactic constraints imposed on nonfinal compounds.
For example, in "PA'.IL(file) SOGSEONG(attribute) BYEONKYEONG (change)", "SOGSEONG(attribute)" is the object of the predicative noun "BYEONKYEONG (change)".
It can be expanded to a sentence like "X changes the .file attribute".
In other words, the syntactic lewfls of two phrases "PA'IL SOGSEONG(file ~ttribute)" and "BYEONKYEONG(change)" in the compound noun are different, where one is NP and the other is VP.
That the syntactic levels (i.e.
syntactic categories) of nominal compounds are different means that the different method is required for the proper a,nalysis of their structures.
Next, a predicative noun does not subcategorize more than two nominals with the same granunatical cases.
For instance, a predicative norm in a nominal compound governs either a subject or an object at most.
The situation is w-~ry sinfilar to that occurred in a sentence.
In this paper, this is called one case per sentence, which means that a predicative noun cannot subcategorize two nouns of the same grammatical cases when the relations of nominals can be expanded to a sentence.
3 Acquiring
Lexical Knowledge We collect lexical co-occurrence instances from corpus in order to get knowledge tor nominal compound analysis.
The text material is composed of 40 million (:ojeols of Yonsei Lexicographical Center corpus a.mt KAIST corpus (330M bytes).
The Korean morphoh)gi(:al analyzer, the POS tagger and the partial parser are used to obtain co-occurreu(:es.
In order to construct linguistic lexical data tbr nominals, we first, extracted verbnoun CO-OCcurrence (|ata fi'onl (;()rpus using the partial parser.
A noun is c(mnected to a verb with a synta(:ti(: relation, and the co-occurrences are re,1)rescnted t)y triples (verb, nou'n,, syntactic rda, t'io'H,).
The postpositions are reposited in tit(,, syntactic relation feld in order to represent the syntacti(: relations which might o(:cur tmtween two nouns.
Nominal pairs with (:omplenmnt-predi(:ate relation are derived fl'om the data extracted.
Predicative nomls l)e(:()me vexbs with the verbalization suffix such as '-HA-' attached.
For exampl(,,, the predicative noun 'KEOMSAEK(retrieva.1)' is verbalized to 'KEOMSAEK-HA(retrieve)' 1)y adding the suffix '-HA-'.
Theretbr(~, we (:an get 294 c~mq)lement-predicate relations by reducing w;rl)s to predicative nouns with cutting, if ;my, the verbalization suffix.
Table 2 shows s(Hne llOun-nouIl co-occurrence examples of,omplement-predicate relation derived in that way.
Second, co-occurrences colnposed of only two 1,orals (complete nominal compound) were obrained.
In Korean, complete nominal comIT(rends arc extracted in the tbllowing way.
Let us suplmse that N, NA, NP be the set of nouns, the set of nouns with tile possessive postposi-,:ion, and the set of nouns with a postposition ~xcept the possessive postposition, respectively.
• For eojeols et,e2,e3, where el ¢ N U NA, e2 E NUNA, e3 E NP, count (n2, ha), where 'r~,2 and n3 are tile nouns that belong to e~ and e:~ respectively.
The data could contain two relations e.g. modifier-head relation and complement-head relation.
Therefbre, we manually divide them into two classes by hand according to the relation.
Many erroneous pairs could be removed by the ma,nual process.
Furthermore, we manually assign to each nominal pair syntactic relations such as SUB J, OBJ and ADV since the synta(:tic relation does not explicitly appear from Ira.its obtained in the second (Table 3), Actually, there is it() immanent syntactic relation between two nouns of modifier-head relation.
On the other hand, some syntactic relation such as case marker and adverbial relation can be given to two nouns with complement-predicate relation.
Some examples are given in Table 3.
The data of complement-head relation are merged with those established with the partial parser, which are complement-head co-occurrences.
The rest of the data have modifier-head co-occurrences.
Consequently, the complement-predicate cooccurrence is represented with a triple {comp',,o'wn,, pred-noun, syn-rel) as shown in Table 2.
Syntactic relation is described with postposition tbr case mark or ADV in Korean.
The syntactic relation is not given to the modifier-head cooccurrence.
In the corpus based approach for natural language processing, we should take into consideration the data sparseness problem because the data do not contain whole phenomena of the language in most cases.
Ma~W researchers have proposed conceptual asso(:iation to ba(:k off the lexical association on the assumption that words within a (;lass behave similarly (Resnik, 1993; Kobayasi et aal., 1994; Lauer, 1995).
Namely, word classes were stored instead of word cooccurrences.
Here, we must note that predicates does not act according to their semantic category.
Predicates tend to have wholly different case frames ti'om each other.
Thus, we stored individual predicative nouns and semantic classes of their arguments instead of each semantic class tor two nouns: In effect, given a word co-occurrence pair ('nl,'n2) and, if any, a syntactic relation s, it is transfbrmed and counted in the fbllowing way.
1. Let ci be the thesaurus class which ni belongs to.
2. If (nl,n2) are a pair in eo-occurrences of complement-predicate relation 3.
Then 4.
For each ci which nl belongs to, 5.
Increase the \]~'equency of (ci, 'n2, s) with the count of (~1, n~).
(Here,,s is an immanent syntactic relation) 6.
Else 7.
For" each class ci and c i to which 'n~ and n2 belongs respectively, 8.
Increase the .#'equency of (ci, cj) with the count of (n~,,~) Consequently, we built two knowledge sources with different properties, so that we needed to make the method to deal with them.
In the next section, we will explain the effective method of analysis based on that different lexical knowledge.
4 Nominal
Compound Analysis In order to make tile process efficient, the analyzer identifies the relations in a nominal compound, if any, which can be the guideline of phrase structuring, and then analyzes the structures based on the relations.
Figure 2 shows an example of the phrase structure of a nominal compound to include the complement-predicate relation.
We showed that the nominal compound with the complementpredicate relation can be expanded to a simple sentence which contains NPs and VP.
This means again that the nonfinal compound with 295 argument predicative noun syntactic relation GAENYEOM(concept) YEONGU(study) OBJ GYEONJEHAG(eeonomics) YEONGU(study) OBJ GWAHAGJA(scientist) YEONGU(study) SUBJ Table 2: Noun-noun co-occurrence examples derived from lexical data of predicate YEONGUHA(research) first noun second noun immanet syntactic relation (meaning) DAMBAE(tobacco) GAGE(store) CHARYANG (car) GAGYEOG(price) GEUMSOG(metal).
GAGONG(process) OBJ(process metal) WANJEON(wholeness) GADONG(operation) ADV(operate wholly) Table 3: Examples the complement-predicate relation can be divided into one or more phrasal units which we (:all inside phruse.
The nonfihal compound in Figure 2 has three inside phrases NPsuBJ, NPoBJ and V.
Some nonfinal compounds may not have any inside phrase.
Besides, the structure in each inside phrase can be determined by the word cooccurrence based method presented by Lauer (1995) and.
(Kobayasi et aal., 1994), i.e. only statistical association.
4.1 Association
between nouns Inside phrases can be detected based on the association, since two nouns associated with the complement-predicate relation indicate existence of an inside phrase.
We distinguish the association relation by discriminating knowledge source.
Thus the associations are calculated in a different way as follows.
Here, ambi(n) is the number of thesaurus classes in which n appears, and Nc'p and NMH are the total number of the complement-predicate and the modifierhead co-occurrencesrespectively.
. Complement-Predicate The association can be computed based (m the complement-predicate relations obtained from complement-predicate cooccurrence data.
It measures the strength of statistical association between a noun, 'At, and a predicative noun, n.2, with a given syntactii~ relation s which is the syntactic relation like subject, object, adverb.
Let ci 1)e categories to which nl belongs.
Then, the degree that nl is associated with n2 as of two nouns analyzed . the complement of n2 is defined as tbllows: Assoccp (?t,1, n2) -.~ 1 freq(ci, 'n2) (1) × i Modifier-Head The association of two nouns is estimated by the co-occurrences wlfich were collected for the modifier-head relation.
In the similar way to the above, let ci and qj be the categories to which 'n, and 'n2 belongs respectively.
Then, the association degree of nl and n2 is defined as tbllows: ASSOCMH(ni,n2)-1 ×Z freq(ci,cj) NMH . a'm, bi(nl )ambi(n2) (2) The syntactic relation is deternfined by the association.
If' the association between two nouns can be computed by the t'ornnfla 1, the complement-t)redicate relation is given to the nouns.
If not, the relation of two nouns is simply concluded with the modifier-head relation.
We can recognize the syntactic relation inside a nominal (:Oml)OmM by the association involved.
In order to distinguish the associations in accordance with the relations, the association is expressed by a triple (relation, (sy'n-'re, l, v.,l'u,e.)}.
Tim relation is chosen with CP or MH a~:c:ording to the fi)rmula used to estimate the a.ssocia.tion.
If 'relation is CP, the syn-'rc, l has a,s its va.lue SUB J, OBJ, ADV etc., which arc given by co-oc~:urrence data acquired.
()therwise, (/) is assigned.
Lastly, the value is computed by the tbrnnfla.
The association is estimated in the tbllowing way, 296 I ! s \] _~VP /-t f~_-~ ~_ i NPsuBJ NPoB J V I NP NPsuBa NPom NP v,,'" SAYONGJA-YI",,."'FILE SOKSEONG",,,'" BYEONKYEONG'" "..
(of user) ./" "-.
(file) (attribute)"..
".. (change) '..
Figure 2: Example of the phrase structure of a nominal compound l,h(:r(:fl)re: ff A.~,~o(:c.,p(, l,"~,'2) > 0 As.s,,(:(.,,.,,,,..2) = (CP,(.W,,n-rel, Assoecp (n,,,,.2))) ( './,,'i ( ', .4.s.so(:(,,,,, ",'2) = (MH,(¢, ASSOeMH(nl, n2))) If no co-occurrence data for a nominal (:Oml)ound are fbund in both databases, the modifier-head relations is assumed and the left association is favored tbr unseen data.
The lm;ti-wence of left association is reasonable tbr I)ra.cketing of nonfinal compounds since the left associations occupy the bracketing patterns lnuch more than the right associations as shown in Ta,l)le 6.
4.2 Parsing
Since the head always tbllows its complement in Korean, the ith noun in the nominal compound consisting of n nouns has head candidates of,,,i that it might be depend on, and the parser selects the most probable one from them.
The parser determines the head of a complement by a,n association degree of head candidates for the complement.
The easiest way is to have the head candidate list sorted on the association, and select most strongly associative one.
In the process of selection, the tbllowing constraints are imposed if the relation of two nouns is complementpredicate(CP).
Given a nominal compound of three nouns (?~, 1., '//,2, ha), • If (n2, ha) are related with CP and the syntactic relation of (",2, ",:3) is the same as that of (nl, ha), then "~,l is not dependent on n3.
This is called one case per sentence constraint.
If nl has an association with n2 by CP relation, it does not have dependency relation with ha.
See Figure 1 If n2 plays an adverbial role tbr ha, then n, is not linked with rt,2.
Cross dependency is not allowed.
It means that dependent-head relations do not cross each other.
As an example, given the nominal compound "iDAEJUNG(public) ~MUNHWA(culture) aBIPAN(criticism)", we can get the association table as shown in Table 4.
According to the table, the first and second noun can be linked with the modifier-head relation and the association degree of 0.00021.
The second noun can depend on the third noun with the complement-predicate relation, and the association degree is 0.00018.
Furthermore, the argument is inihrred to the object of the predicate, which can be easily recognized by the co-occurrence data extracted.
The table is sorted on the association so that the parser can easily search tbr the probable candidate for head.
In order to effectively detect inside phrases and check the constraints, the syntactic relation should be checked prior to the comparison of the association value.
That is, the first key is the rdal:ion and the second, association value.
Thus, CP > MH, and the 297 2 3 (MH, (¢, 0.00021)) (CP, (OBJ, 0.00014)) (CP, (OBJ, 0.00018)) Table 4: Association table(AT) for the example nominal compound "DAEJUNG MUNHWA BIPAN" association values are compared in case of the sanle rvlation value.
As a consequence, the association table is actually implemented to the association list as follows: \[DAEJUNG (public)\](3,OBJ, ( CP, O.O0014)) (2,¢,(MH,0.00021)) \[MUNHWA (culture)\](3,OBJ, (CP,0.00018)) From the list we know it is probable that the noun "DAEJUNG(public)" is dependent on "BIPAN(criticism)" with OBJ relation.
On the other hand, two words "DAEJUNG(public)" and "MUNHWA(culture)" are tbund in modifier-head co-occurrences and thus associated with the modifier-head relation.
Then, the parsing process can be defined as follows: h, ead( n,: ) = 'at (3) l = index( max (Assoc(ni, nj))) j=i+ l,...,k Here index returns the index of noun nl whose association with ni is the maximum.
Namely, the parser tries to find the following candidate tbr the head of each noun ni in a nominal compound consisting of k nouns, and make n link between them.
If constraints are violated while parsing, the next candidate of the list is considered by the parser.
According to the algorithm, the given example is parsed as follows: . There is only one candidate for "MUNHWA".
"MUNHWA(culture)" has the dependency on "BIPAN(criticism)" with object relation.
The fact that there is tim complement-predicate relation lmtween two nouns indicates that those are the elements of inside phrases, where one belongs to NP and the other has the property of VP.
The inside phrases are detected by the syntactic relation.
2. The most probable candidate of "DAEJUNG(public)" is also "BIPAN(criticism)", but it violates one case per sentence since the predicative noun already took the object.
Thus, another candidate is taken.
3. The next head candidate "MUNHWA(culture)" is satisfactory to the constraints as the modifier-head relation, and "DAEJUNG(public)" is linked to "MUNHWA(culture)" with the relation.
5 Experimental
Results For experiments, we collected 387 nominal compounds fronl a million word corpus.
Nominal compounds conlposed of more.
than tbur nouns (a series of 5 nouns or more) are excluded because the number of them is too small to evaluate our system.
Some examples of analysis are shown in Table 5.
In the table, the modifier-head relation is represented with MH, and the complementpredicate is described with OBJ and SUBJ that means object and subject respectively.
No depedency between nouns is marked with '-' For instance, the modifier-head relation is assigned to "MUSOG SINANG" which have the meaning of the religion o.f private society that is traditional and s'alJerstitio'as.
However, we don't know about the semantic relation hidden in the results analyzed.
In addition, the nominal compound "JISIK'IN-YI(intellex:tual's) CHAEK'IM (responsibility) HOIPI(evasion)" means that the intellectual evades h, is responsibility.
Actually, its structure is determined as \[JISIK'IN-YI,s,,t~./ \[CHAEK'IMot~./ HOIPIv\]\] which can be ext)anded to a, siml)le sentence.
Bracketed patterns of the example uonfinal conlpounds are shown in %tble 6.
According to the table, the baseline a.ccm'acy of the default system is at least 73.6%.
As shown in Table 7, the precision fi)r nnalysis of nominal comt)ounds 298 nominal compounds(n1, n2, ha) structure R.(n,.,'n,2) iI~(v,,,'n:~) /~('n2,na) MUSOG SIN'ANG JEONTONG ((nl n2) n3) MH MH (private society, religion,tradition) DAEJUNG MUNHWA BIPAN ((nl n2) n3) MH OBJ (public, culture, criticism) FRANCE KEUNDAE MUNHAG (nl (n2 n3)) MH MH (France, modern, literature) .I\[SIK'IN-YI CHAEK'IM HOIPI (nl (n2 n3)) SUB.I OBJ (intelh;(:tual's, responsibility, evasion) Ta.lfle 5: Examples of some nominal compound analyses, R(n,z, ',,~) is the, synta.ctic relation between ",i a,n(1%; identified ifof n(mns in NP pattern fl'eq (nl-YI (n2 n3)) ((n>Y~ n2) n3) ((nl n2) n3) (nl (n2 ha)) (nl-YI (n2 (n3 n4))) ((nl-YI (n2 n3)) n4) (((nl-YI n2) n3) n4) (nl-YI ((n2 n3) n4) ((nl ng).
(ha n4)) (((nl n2) n3)n4) (nl ((n2 n3) n4)) ((nl (n2 n3)) n4) (nl (n2 (n3 n4))) 54 31 189 41 2 10 4 6 9 32 Ta,lfle 6: the patterns of nominal compound s(;ru(;t;ures ot' the length three and four is about 88.3% and 66.3%.
The result is fairly good in that nomi~m.1 compounds of length three occur much more t'requently than those of length four.
Overall I~recision of analysis is about 84.2%.
In addition, we compared three different models to evaluate our system default model by the dominant pattern, dependency model presented by Kobayasi et al.(1994) and Lauer (1995), a.nd our model.
In the default analysis, nomiha.1 compounds were bracketed by the dominant pa,tterns shown in Table 6.
For the dependency model, we used the method presented by Lauer (1995).
Table 8 shows the comparison of the results produced by our algorithm and the other two methods.
Our system made a better result in the disambiguation process.
The results show that the syntactic information in nomihal phrases plays an important role in deciding their structures.
However, there are still errors produced.
Some nouns has the word sense ambiguity, and are used as both predict~tive noun and common noun.
Because of the sense ambiguity, some modifier-head relations are misrecognized to complement-predicate.
Other errors contain the same kind of results as (Latter, 1995).
To overcome the errors, we think that semantic relations immanent in two nouns are considered.
6 Conclusion
Many statistical parsers have not taken care of analysis of nominal compounds.
Furthermore, many researches which dealt with nominal compound parsing seemed not to have computational approaches tbr linguistic phenomenon in nominal compounds.
We proposed Korean nominM compound analysis based on linguistic statstical knowledge.
Actually, immanent syntactic relations like subject and object as well as structures of nominal compounds arc identified using our nominal compound analyzer and knowledge acquisition method.
Syntactic relations identified can be effectively used in semantic interpretation of nominal compound.
Moreover, the parser was more accurate by using linguistic knowledge such as structural information and syntactic relation immanent in nouns.
It is expected that our parsing results including identification of syntactic relations are useful for the application system such as information extraction because many nominal compounds are contained in Korean document bodies and titles, which often represent some events.
However, the system still has some difficul299 # of nominal compounds # of success I precision 3 nouns 315 278 88.3 4 nouns 72 48 \[ 66.3 total 387 326 84.2 Table 7: Overall results of nominal compound analysis total # of success precision 3 nouns precision 4 nouns precision (1) 285 73.6 77.1 58.3 (2) 315 81.4 85.4 63.9 (3) 326 84.2 88.3 66.3 Table 8: Results of nominal compound analysis (1) default analysis by pattern (2) results using the dependency model (3) results using our algorithm ties, which caused erroneous results.
In the future work, we feel it is necessary that lexical I)arameters be transformed into conceptual parameters with large size of semantic knowledge, and filrther studies on linguistic properties of nominals be made.
References Arens, Y., Granacki, J.
J., and Parker, A.
C. 1987.
Phrasal Analysis of Long Noun Sequences In Proceedings o.f the 25th Annual Meeting of A CL Choi, K.
S., Han, Y.
S., Han, Y.
G., and Kwon, O.
W. 1994.
KAIST Tree Bank Project for Korean: Present and Future Development.
In P'mceedings of the International Workshop on Sharable Natural Language Resources.
Finin, T.
W. 1980.
The semantic interpretation of compound nominals.
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
University Microfilms Iilternational.
Hindle, D., and Rooth, M.
1993. Structural Ambiguity and Lexical Relations.
In Computational.Linguistics Vol.
19(1). Isabelle, P, 1984.
Another Look at Nominal Compomlds In Proceedings of COLING 84 Kobayasi, Y:, Takenobu, T., and Hozumi, T., 1994.
Analysis of Japanese Compound Nouns Using Collocational hlformation.
In Proceedi'ags of COLING 94 Lauer, M.
1995. Corpus Statistics Meet the Noun Compound: Some Empirical Results.
In P'mceedings of the 33'rd Annual Meeting (tf ACL Levi, J.
1978. The Syntax and Semantics of Complex Nominals.
Academic Marcus, M.
1980. A Theory of Synta(:tic Recognition fbr Natural Language.
Cambridge and London: MIT Press McDonald, D.
B. 1982.
Understanding Noun Compounds.
Carnegie-Mellon University.
Pustejovsky, J.
and Anick, P.
G. 1988.
On the Semantic Interpretation of Nominals In Proceedings of COLING 88 Pustejovsky, J., Bergler, S., and Anick, P.
1993. Lexical Semanti(: Te(:hni(tues fbr Corpus Analysis.
In Computational Linguistics Vol.
19(2). Resnik, P.
1993. Selection and hdbrmation: A Class-Based Al)t)roa(:h to Lexi(:al Relationships.
Ph.D. dissertation.
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
Selkirk, E.
1982. The Syntax of Words.
MIT Press Sproat, R.
W. 1985.
()n Deriving the Lexicon.
Doctoral Dissertation, MIT.
Sproat, R.
W. and Lil)erman M.
Y. 1987.
Toward Treating English Nominals C()rrectly.
In Proceedings of the 25th, An'n, ual Meeting of ACL Vanderwerde, L.
1994. Algorithm tbr Automarie Intert)retation of Noun Sequences In Proceedings of COLING 94 Zhai, C.
1997. Fast Statisti(:nl Parsing ()f Noun Phrases tbr Documenting Indexing.
In PTvceedings of the 5th, Co'nf, re,nce on Applied Nat'a~nl Langv, age P'mcc, s.sing

