! Hybrid Disambiguation of Prepositional Phrase Attachment and Interpretation Sven Hartrumpf Applied Computer Science VII (AI) University of Hagen 58084 Hagen, Germany Sven.Hartrumpf@fernuni-hagen.de Abstract In this paper, a hybrid disambiguation method for the prepositional phrase (PP) attachment and interpretation problem is presented.
1 The
data needed, semantic PP interpretation rules and an annotated corpus, is described first.
Then the three major steps of the disambiguation method are: explained.
Cross-validated evaluation results', for German (88.6-94.4% correct for binary attachment ambiguities, 83.392.5% correct for interpretation ambiguities) show that disambiguation methods combining interpretation! rules and statistical methods might yield significantly better results than nonhybrid disambiguation methods.
1 Introduction
The problem of prepositional phrase (PP) attachment ambigu!ty is one of the most famous problems in natural language processing (NLP).
In recent years, many statistical solutions have been proposed: lexical associations (see (Hindle and Rooth, 1993)); error-driven transformation learning (see (Brill and Resnik, 1994), extensions by (Ye h and Vilain, 1998)); backedoff estimation (see (Collins and Brooks, 1995), extended to the multiple PP attachment problem by (Merlo et al., 1997)); loglinear model (see (Franz, 1996b), (Franz, 1996a, pp.
97108)); maximum:entropy model (see (Ratnaparkhi, 1998; Ratnaparkhi et al., 1994)).
The disambiguation method in this paper has two key features: First, it tries to solve the 1This disambiguation method was developed for an NLI in the Virtuelle Wissensfabrik ( Virtual Knowledge Factory, see (Knoll et al., 1998)), a project funded by the German state Nordrhein-Westfalen, which supported this research in part.
I would like to thank Rainer Osswald and the anonymous reviewers for their useful comments and suggestions.
PP attachment problem and the PP interpretation problem.
Second, it is hybrid as it combines more traditional PP interpretation rules and statistical methods.
2 Data
2.1 PP interpretation rules One central component for the disambiguation method presented in this paper are semantic interpretation rules for PPs.
A PP interpretation rule consists of a premise and a conclusion.
The premise of an interpretation rule describes under which conditions the PP interpretation specified by the rule's conclusion can be valid.
Two example rules for the local and contents interpretation of 'fiber' ('about'/'above'/'on'/'over'/'via'/)... are shown in Figure 1.
As (at least) five more interpretations of 'fiber' are possible, the ambiguity degree for the interpretation of such a PP is (at least) seven.
The premise of a rule is a set of feature structure constraints (including negated and disjunctive constraints and defining an underspecified feature structure) that refer to the following features of the preposition's sister NP (nominal phrase) and the preposition's mother NP or V (verb).
(The features that are only refered to for the sister NP are marked by an S).
case (S) syntactic case: genitive, dative, and accusative for German PPs num (S) syntactic number: singular and plural in German sort a semantic sort value (atomic or disjunctive value) from a predefined ontology (see (Helbig and Schulz, 1997)) comprising 45 sorts.
The most important 111 id fiber.loc id fiber.mcont explanation cl is/happens above the location of explanation cl contains information about the c2.
topic described by c2.
examples 'Flugzeuge fiber Seen' ('air planes examples 'Bficher fiber Seen' ('books on above lakes'),...
lakes'), ...
premise cl (sort (dis object situation)) premise cl (sort (dis object situation)) (info +) c2 (case dat) (sort concrete-object) c2 (case acc) (sort object) conclusion net (loc cl c3) (*ueber c3 c2) conclusion net (mcont cl c2) The semantic network node cl corresponds to the mother, the node c2 to the sister, and c3 etc.
are additional nodes.
A disjunction of feature values is introduced by dis.
Figure 1: PP interpretation rules for two interpretations of 'fiber' sorts for nouns axe object and its subsorts con-object (concrete object, with subsorts dis-object (discrete object) and substance) and abs-object (abstract object, with subsorts tem-abstractum (temporal abstractum), abs-situation (abstract situation), attribute, etc.).
Verbs can belong to sort stat-situation (static situation) or sort dyn-situation (dynamic situation, with subsorts action and event).
A disjunctive value represents a concept family (as introduced by (Bierwisch, 1983); closely related axe dotted types, see for example (Buitelaax, 1998)), e.g., the noun 'book' comprises a physical object variant and an abstract information variant.
etype extension type for distinguishing individuals ('child', 'table'), sets of individuals ('men', 'group', 'people'), etc.
The rest of the features are semantic Boolean features as shown in Table 1.
2 The
conclusion of a rule is a semantic interpretation of the PP, which can be valid if the premise is satisfied by the sister and the mother.
The rules' semantic representation uses a multilayered extended semantic network formalism (MESNET, see for example (Helbig and Schulz, 1997)), which has been successfully applied in various areas (e.
g., in the Virtual Knowledge Factory, see (Knoll et al., 1998)).
Besides the premise and the conclusion, 2Of course, other sets of such features are possible; the choice was made by selecting relevant features from the set of semantic features in an existent German inheritance lexicon (see (Haxtrumpf and Schulz, 1997)), which contains 7000 lexemes and is used by the disambiguation method.
each rule contains a mnemonic identifier like in.loc (which consists of the preposition's orthographic form followed by an abbreviation derived from the semantic interpretation in the conclusion), a short explanation, and a set of example sentences that can be interpreted using this rule.
From a set of rules for 160 German prepositions collected by (Tjaden, 1996), all rules for six important (i.
e., frequent) prepositions were taken as a starting point for development and evaluation of a hybrid disambiguation method.
Sentences were retrieved from a development test corpus to refine these rules.
2.2 Corpus
While PP interpretation rules form the rule component of the hybrid disambiguation method, an annotated corpus serves as the source of the statistical component.
For each preposition under investigation, a number of candidate sentences that possibly show attachment ambiguity for this preposition were automatically extracted from a corpus.
This corpus is based on the online version of the Sfiddeutsche Zeitung, starting from August 1997.
The corpus is marked up according to the Corpus Encoding Standard (see (Ide et al., 1996)) and word, sentence, and paragraph identifiers are assigned.
The preposition in a candidate sentence is semiautomatically annotated with five attributes: sister The position of the right-most word of the preposition's sister NP.
Postnominal genitive NPs modifying the main sister NP are included in this annotation.
112 feature name description of entities with positive (+) value examples animate (S) geogr human info instit instru (S) legper mental method potag an animate entity a geographical concept a human entity an entity that carries information an institution an entity that can be used as an instrument a legal person a mental state or process a method a (potential) agent 'animal', 'person', 'tree' 'city', 'country' 'child', 'president' 'book', 'concert' 'company', 'parliament' 'hammer', 'ladder' 'company', 'woman' 'fear', 'happiness' 'compression', 'filtering' 'horse', 'man' Table 1: Semantic Boolean features in PP interpretation rules i mother The position of the syntactic head word of the mother NP or V.
amother The list: of alternative mothers represented byilthe position of the syntactic head word of an NP or V.
An alternative mother is a syntactically possible mother distinct from the (correct) mother.
All alternative mothers plus the (correct) mother form the set of candidate mothers for PP attachment.
c-id A character string that identifies the semantic reading of the preposition and corresponds to the identifier in a PP interpretation rule (sea Figure 1).
c A character string for comments and documentation purposes.
The preposition in corpus sentence (1) is annotated as shown by the SGML element in (2).
The meaning of this annotation can be illustrated as in (3): th'e PP's sister ends at 'Seite'; the PP attaches to: 'gebaut', and could syntactically also be attached to the NP with head 'Depot' or the NP ~ith head 'Museums'; the interpretation of the ~PP is a local one (auf.loc).
3 (1) Und wieso wird das neue Depot And why is the new depot des De utsch-Deutschen the+GEN German-German Museums huff bayerischer Seite Museum on~ Bavarian side 3please note that the translations of sentences (1) and (4) are not ambiguous: gebaut, nachdem die Planungen fiir built, after the plannings for die Thiiringer Talseite schon the Thuringian valley-side already fertig waren? ready were?
'And why is the new depot of the German-German Museum built on the Bavarian side, after the planning for the Thuringian side of the valley has already been completed'?
(2) 19971002bay_c.p3.s2.w10 (article bay_c, 1997-10-02, paragraph 3, sentence 2, word 10): (w c-id="auf.loc" sister=" 12" mother=" 13" amother--"6/9")auf(/w) (3) Und wieso wird das neue Depot al des Deutsch-Deutschen Museums a2 auf auf'l°c bayerischer Seite s gebaut m, nachdem die Planungen ffir die Thfiringer Talseite schon fertig waren?
The annotation process is semiautomatic: the machine guesses the attribute values following some heuristics; these guesses have to be checked and possibly extended or corrected by a human annotator.
This kind of annotation, of course, is labor-intensive.
But due to the development of an Tcl/Tk annotation tool optimized for manual annotation speed, the average annotation time per candidate sentence dropped under 30 seconds.
Furthermore, the following sections show that a small set of annotated sentences achieves promising results for PP attachment and interpretation.
The lexicon (see footnote 2) had to be extended for the nouns and 113 verbs annotated as head words of sisters or candidate mothers that were not in the lexicon and could not be analyzed by a compound analysis module.
Some candidate sentences were excluded from the investigation because the PP involves a problem that is supposed to be solved by other NLP modules 4 and could disturb the evaluation of the PP disambiguation module (e.
g., by producing noise for the statistical part).
All exclusion criteria are listed in Table 2 with percentages of instances of such exclusions relative to the number of candidate sentences.
In short, sentences are excluded when their PP ambiguity problem • can be solved by separate components (for support verb constructions and idioms) or • can only be solved if the PP attachment and interpretation is supported by another component (for complex named entities, ellipsis resolution, and foreign language expressions).
The first 120 non-excluded candidate sentences for each preposition were chosen and randomally split into eight parts for cross validation.
Eight evaluations were carried out with one part being the evaluation test corpus and the remaining seven parts being the evaluation training corpus.
Sometimes, it makes no semantic difference whether a PP in a sentence attaches to an NP or a V.
This is known as systematic ambiguity (or systematic indeterminacy, see (Hindle and Rooth, 1993, p.
112)). Two subtypes of this phenomenon are systematic locative ambiguity (see corpus sentence (4)) and systematic contents ambiguity.
(4) Bis ein Bescheid ml aus aus'°rigl Until a notification from Karlsruhe 8 eintriJyt m2, kann es Karlsruhe comes-in, can it Monate dauern.
months take.
(19971001fern_d.p3.s6.w4) 'It might take months until a notification from Karlsruhe comes in'.
4It should be evaluated in further research how well such modules solve these problems.
The frequency of such ambiguities depends heavily on the preposition; on the average, there were 4.3% cases of systematic ambiguity.
5 For
English, (Hindle and Rooth, 1993, p.
116) report that 77 out of 880 sentences (8.75%) were systematically ambiguous.
In such sentences, an attachment can be considered correct if it is one of the two attachments connected by systematic ambiguity; both parsing results will lead to identical results in an NLP application if it contains sufficiently developed inference components.
Table 3 shows for the evaluation corpus (720 sentences 6) where the PP attaches to (columns V, NP1, NP2 (the second closest NP), NP3, NP4), how many attachments are syntactically possible (number of candidate mothers; columns labeled 1 to 5), and how frequent systematic ambiguity is (last column).
3 HYbrid
disambiguation method • 3.1 Basic ideas PP attachment is one of the most famous problems in NLP.
But where a PP attaches to, is only half of the story of the PP's contribution to an utterance; the other half is how it is to be interpreted.
And clearly, these two questions are not independent.
So, why not tackle both problems at once, trying to achieve for both problems results that are better than the results obtained by an isolated PP attachment component and an isolated PP interpretation component?
As both problems depend on each other, there is the strong hope that this is the case.
To investigate this hypothesis, such a disambiguation method was developed and evaluated.
The input to the disambiguation method is the feature structure p for the preposition, the feature structure s for the parse of the preposition's sister NP, and the feature structures cmi for the (trivial) parses of the syntactic head words of all candidate mothers.
The output is the mother the PP is to be attached to and the • interpretation the preposition plus the sister NP contribute to the meaning of the enclosing sentence.
The overall structure of this disambiguation method comprises three steps.
First, all sets 5All annotated sentences showing systematic ambiguity contain only the two candidate mothers that are related by the underlying systematic ambiguity.
6These annotated sentences are available for research.
114 short name description % of tokens cne-amother amother is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc).
0.1 cne-mother mother is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc).
0.4 cne-sister sister is a complex named entity (titles of books, etc).
0.6 ell-amother amother is elliptic 0.1 ell-mother mother is elliptic 0.1 ell-sister I sister is elliptic 0.5 fle-amother amother is a foreign language expression 0.1 fie-mother mother is a foreign language expression 0.1 idi-amother amother is an idiom (or part of an idiom) 0.1 idi-moth~r mother is an idiom 0.4 idi-pp PP is an idiom 3.6 idi-pp-mother PP plus mother is an idiom 0.9 idi-pp-v.
PP plus verb is an idiom 0.5 problem unclassified problem 0.7 svc PP is part of a support verb construction 0.5 svc-amo~her amother of the PP is a support verb construction 0.3 svc-mother mother of the PP is a support verb construction 1.0 sum 10.1 Table 2: Exclusion criteria for candidate sentences preposition observed attachment % ambiguity degree % sys.
amb. % V NP1 NP2 NP3 NP4 1 2 3 4 5 auf 56.7 38.3 5.0 0.0 0.0 13.3 58.3 24.2 2.5 1.7 5.0 aus 22.5 75.0 2.5 0.0 0.0 35.8 51.7 8.3 4.2 0.0 10.0 bei 52.5 42.5 5.0 0.0 0.0 30.8 51.7 14.2 1.7 1.7 6.7 fiber 37.1 57.1 5.0 0.8 0.0 17.5 66.7 13.3 0.8 1.7 2.5 vor 41.3 52.1 5.0 1.7 0.0 23.3 61.7 13.3 1.6 0.0 0.8 wegen 62.1 26.3 10.0 1.7 0.0 9.2 74.2 14.2 1.7 0.8 0.8 average 45.4 48.5 5.4 0.7 0.0 21.7 60.7 14.6 2.1 1.0 4.3 Table 3: Attachment data from the evaluation corpus of possible interpretations PIi of the PP plus a given candidate mother cmi are determined by applying the PP interpretation rules.
Second, for each set of possible interpretations PIi, one interpretation sii is selected using interpretation statistics (on semantics).
Third, among all selected sii, one interpretation is chosen based on attachment statistics (on semantics and syntax) and additional factors.
These steps will be presented in more detail in the following three subsections.
3.2 Application
of interpretation rules Step 1 of the disambiguation method (determining possible interpretations PIi) is driven by testing the premises of PP interpretation rules.
From the set of interpretations PIt whose rule premises are satisfied, interpretations are removed that violate adjunct constraints from the lexicon or constraints from the underlying semantic formalism 7 (see step 1 in Figure 2).
~Of course, constraints from the semantic formalism could be added to the rules.
But this would introduce redundancy which would make the rules difficult to develop and maintain.
115 n is the number of possible attachments (cml, ..., cram).
m is the number of rules for preposition p (rl, ..., rm).
1. for each candidate mother cmi (a) PIt : {(p, 8, cmi, rj) I 1 ~ j _< m, premise of rule rj is satisfied by sister s and cmi} (b) PIi = set of all (p, s, cmi, r) E PIt which fulfill the following conditions: • Semantic relations in the conclusion of r are licensed by compatible relations listed in the feature structure cmi, which come from lexical entries (or lexical defaults).
• Semantic relations in the conclusion of r do not violate the signature constraints that are defined for these relations in the underlying semantic network formalism.
2. for each candidate mother cmi with nonempty PIi (a) sii = arg max~ rf(r, {rj 13(p, s, cmi, rj) e PIi}), where pi = (p, s, cmi, r) E PIi 3.
for each candidate mother cmi with nonempty PIi (a) d = distance in words between candidate mother cmi and the PP (p plus s) (b) scoresi~ = rf((r, cat(cmi)), {(rj, cat(cmk)) I 1 < k < n, P!k ¢ ~, Sik = (p, S, cmk, rj)}) + scoredist(d), where sii = (p, s, cmi, r) si = arg maxsi~ scoresi~, where 1 < i < n, PIi ~ Figure 2: Disambiguation algorithm To simplify Figure 2, the treatment of complements is excluded.
Interpretations that are licensed by lexical complement information for candidate mothers are also determined in step 1.
Experiments showed that it is a good strategy to prefer complement interpretations over adjunct interpretations, which are described in the following steps, s Attachment cases where prepositional objects as complements are involved are the easy ones for statistical disambiguation techniques (see for example (Hindle and Rooth, 1993)); in a hybrid system, one can expect such complement information to be in the lexicon, at least in part.
The problem is alleviated as the interpretation rules (which are developed for adjuncts)produce correct results for many complements; but this topic needs further research.
3.3 Interpretation
disambiguation The result of step 1 can be viewed as an attachment-interpretation matrix (aii,j) with size n×m.
A matrix element aii,j corresponds to attaching the PP to candidate mother cmi Sin the rare case of two possible complement interpretations, the verbal one is prefered.
under interpretation rj and represents some kind of preference score.
To solve the attachment and interpretation problem (i.e., to select the right matrix element), statistics can be used.
There are numerous statistical approaches (see section 1), but in the presented approach a statistical component is combined with a rule component (see step 1).
This rule component reduces the degree of ambiguity (i.
e., marks elements in matrix (aii,j) as possible or impossible) and delivers high-level semantic information (the possible semantic interpretations of the PP for a given candidate mother) for statistical disambiguation.
The strategy adopted in this disambiguation method is to do the remaining disambiguation in two steps: first disambiguate the interpretations for each attachment possibility, then disambiguate the attachments based on the first step's result.
So, in step 2 of the disambiguation method, one interpretation for each candidate mother is chosen.
As Table 4 shows, most of the time the correct rule fires (given the correct mother; see recall column), but false rules fire too (see precision column) because interpretation rules refer only to a limited depth 116 preposition readings recall % precision % auf aus bei fiber vor wegen 9 100.0 100.0 6 97.4 39.8 4 93.7 69.8 7 100.0 65.4 6 98.3 54.7 1 100.0 100.0 Table 4: Results of PP interpretation rules for (correct) mothers rf(aus.pars, {aus:origl, aus.pars, aus.sourc}) = 1.0 rf((aus.temp, np), {i(aus.cstr, v), (aus.temp, np)}) ---1.0 Figure 3: Statistical example data for interpretation and attachment of semantics, which can be delivered by realistic parsers for nontrivial domains.
Therefore, there is the need to disambiguate for interpretation.
Here statistics derived from the annotated corpus come into play: relative frequencies are calculated, which serve as estimated probabilities.
As usual in statistical methods for disambiguation, there is a trade-off between depth of learned information (e.
g., number and type of features) and non-sparseness of the resulting matrix-like structure representing the learning results: the deeper the information, the sparser the matrix.
A good compromise for the problem at hand is to regard only the interpretation (identified by therule id) and to establish a limit nint for the number of interpretations.
Empirical results showed that three is a reasonable choice for nint.
An example of an entry in the interpretation statistics is given in the first line of Figure 3 and can be paraphrased as follows: The interpretation aus.pars wins in 100% of the learned cases if the interpretations aus.origl and aus.sourc are possible too.
If there are more than three possible interpretations, standard techniques for reducing to several triples can be used (backed-off estimation, see for example (Katz, 1987), (Collins and Brooks, 1995)).
The relative frequency of rule ri being the correct interpretation among I = {rl, r2,..., rn) is estimated for n > ni t as in equation (5): rf(ri, c) (5) if(r, I) .c c, Ic, I where Ci is the set of all subsets of I with ni~t elements that contain ri.
In step 2 of the disambiguation algorithm (see middle of Figure 2), the rule that maximizes the (estimated) relative frequency must be found for each candidate mother.
3.4 Attachment
disambiguation After step 2, the attachment-interpretation matrix (aQ,j) contains in each row (attachment) one element marked as selected.
9 What
remains to be done is to choose among all attachments with selected interpretation sii one interpretation si.
For this disambiguation task, attachment statistics are employed.
This time the compromise between depth of learned information and non-sparseness can contain more information than just the interpretation id as experiments showed.
A three-valued syntactic-semantic feature cat is added.
It describes the candidate mother with three possible values: v a verb nps an NP that describes a situation (at least partially), e.g., 'continuation' np an NP that does not describe a situation, e.g., 'house' The second line of Figure 3 contains an example that expresses the fact that if the interpretation aus.temp for a nominal candidate mother and the interpretation aus.cstr for a verbal candidate mother compete then the first is correct (in the training corpus) with relative frequency 1.
If one adds even more information to attachment statistics (e.
g., the position of NP candidate mothers like np2 for the second closest NP) the attachment data for the annotations in this paper becomes too sparse.
9There might be rows where no element is marked because none of the rules fired and passed filtering (see section 3.2). 117 As for the interpretation statistics in step 2, standard techniques can reduce tuples that are longer than 2 (hart) to several shorter ones.
The relative frequency of (ri, cat(cmi)) belonging to the correct attachment among A = {(rl, cat(cml)),..., (rn,cat(cmn))} is estimated for n >natt as in equation (6): Erf ( (ri, cat(cmi) ), c) (6) rf((r,,cat(cm,)),A) := tee, where Ci is the set of all subsets of A with natt elements that contain (ri, cat(cmi) ).
These relative frequencies for the selected interpretations sii serve as initial values for an attachment score.
Other factors can add to this score, so that the attachment decision should improve; of course, the value is only a score, not a relative frequency any more.
Different factors (e.
g., distance between candidate mother and the PP; in this way, one can simulate the rightassociation principle, see (Kimball, 1973)) were evaluated.
The following distance scoring function scoredist turned out to be useful: (7) d is the number of words between the candidate mother and the PP.
md is an upper limit for distances.
Longer distances are reduced to md.
(10 is a reasonable choice for md).
scoredist(d) :~{ distw.(md--min( d,md) ) md for NP mothers distw.(rnd--min( d.dist.,md ) ) md for V mothers Good values for the parameters distw (weight of the distance factor) and distv (modification for verbal mothers) depend on the preposition at hand and are learned by testing pairs of values from the range 0.0 to 2.0 (see Table 5).
1° The last step of the disambiguation algorithm is summarized at the bottom of Figure 2.
4 Evaluation
Cross validation (see section 2.2) showed that hybrid disambiguation achieves for both prob1°The best values for these parameters probably also depend on text type, text domain, interpretation of the PP, etc.
preposition distw distv auf, vor, wegen 0.8 0.6 aus 1.2 1.0 bei 1.2 0.8 fiber 0.8 0.2 Table 5: Good parameters for the attachment scoring function scoredist lems, PP attachment and PP interpretation ambiguity, satisfying correctness results for all six prepositions (see Table 6): 88.6-94.4% for binary attachment ambiguities, 85.6-90.8% for all ambiguous attachments, and 75.0-84.2% for ambiguity degrees above 2 (leading to the multiple PP attachment problem).
Comparison of the interpretation results is impossible as these are the first cross-validated results for PP interpretation.
But 83.3-92.5% correctness for prepositions with more than one reading seems very promising.
Comparison of the attachment results is possible, but difficult.
One reason is that the best reported disambiguation results for binary PP attachment ambiguities (84.5%, (Collins and Brooks, 1995); 88.0% using a semantic dictionary, (Stetina and Nagao, 1997)) are for English.
Because word order is freer in German than in English, the frequency and degree of attachment ambiguity is probably higher in German.
There are only few evaluation results for German: (Mehl et al., 1998) achieve 73.9% correctness for the preposition 'mit' ('with'/'to'/)... using a statistical lexical association method.
Of course, the evaluation corpus is not large (720 sentences); so, the results reported in this paper must be treated with some caution.
But as the selected prepositions show diverse numbers of readings (1-9, see Table 4) and the results are cross-validated, it is likely that the reported results will not deteriorate for larger corpora.
5 Conclusions
In this paper, a new hybrid disambiguation method which uses PP interpretation rules and 118 preposition correctness in percentage attachment for ambiguity degree 1 2 3 4 5 _>2 interpretation att.
and int.
_>3 auf i00.0 88.6 75.9 i00.0 100.0 85.6 aus I00.0 90.3 80.0 80.0 88.3 bei i00.0 90.3 82.4 50.0 50.0 86.7 fiber 100.0 88.8 81.3 100.0 100.0 87.9 vor 100.0 89.2 75.0 100.0 87.0 wegen 100.0 94.4 70.6 100.0 100.0 90.8 79.4 92.5 86.7 80.0 90.8 85.8 76.2 91.7 85.0 84.2 83.3 83.3 77.8 89.2 81.7 75.0 100.0 91.7 Table 6: Results of statistics about attachment and interpretation in an annotated corpus was described.
It yields results with competitive correctness for both the PP attachment problem and the PP interpretation problem.
Some questions had to be left open, e.g., a nontrivial reading disambiguation 11 for candidate mothers and sister NPs.
Questions concerning the requisite manual work (maintaining rules and some parts of annotating corpora) arise: How much!does this work pay off and how could more of this work be automated?
The disambiguation method should be evaluated for larger corpora (more sentences, more prepositions) in future research.
The ongoing use of the disambiguation method in natural language interfaces will provide valuable feedback.
llThis is closely related to the problem of word sense disambiguation; currently, this disambiguation is based on frequencies.
hybrid disambiguation References Manfred Bierwisch.
1983. Semantische und konzeptuelle Representation lexikalischer Einheiten.
In ;Rudolf Ru2iSka and Wolfgang Motsch, editor, s, Untersuchungen zur Semantik, Studia grammatica XXII, pages 61-99.
Akademie-Ver!ag, Berlin.
Eric Brill and Philip Resnik.
1994. A rule-based approach to prepositional phrase attachment disambiguation.
In Proceedings of the 15th International .Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 94), pages 1198-1204.
Paul Buitelaar.
!998. CoreLex: Systematic Polysemy and Underspecification.
PhD dissertation, Brandeis University.
Michael Collins and James Brooks.
1995. Prepositional phrase attachment through a backed-off model.
In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Very Large Corpora (WVLC-3).
Alexander Franz.
1996a. Automatic Ambiguity Resolution in Natural Language Processing, volume 1171 of LNAL Springer, Berlin.
Alexander Franz.
1996b. Learning PP attachment from corpus statistics.
In Stefan Wermter, Ellen Riloff, and Gabriele Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Statistical, and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing, volume 1040 of LNAI, pages 188-202.
Springer, Berlin.
Sven Hartrumpf and Marion Schulz.
1997. Reducing lexical redundancy by augmenting conceptual knowledge.
In Gerhard Brewka, Christopher Habel, and Bernhard Nebel, editors, Proceedings of the 21st Annual German Conference on Artificial Intelligence (KI-97), number 1303 in Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 393-396, Berlin.
Springer. Hermann Helbig and Marion Schulz.
1997. Knowledge representation with MESNET: A multilayered extended semantic network.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Ontological Engineering, pages 6472, Stanford, California.
Donald Hindle and Mats Rooth.
1993. Structural ambiguity and lexical relations.
Computational Linguistics, 19(1):103-120, March.
Nancy Ide, Creg Priest-Dorman, and Jean V~ronis, 1996.
Corpus Encoding Standard.
Slava M.
Katz. 1987.
Estimation of probabilities from sparse data for the language model component of a speech recognizer.
IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ASSP-35(3):400-401, March.
John Kimball.
1973. Seven principles of surface structure parsing in natural language.
Cognition, 2:15-47.
A. Knoll, C.
Altenschmidt, J.
Biskup, H.-M.
Blfithgen, I.
G15ckner, S.
Hartrumpf, H.
Helbig, C.
Henning, Y.
Karabulut, R.
Lfiling, B.
Monien, T.
Noll, and N.
Sensen. 1998.
An integrated approach to semantic evaluation and content-based retrieval of multimedia documents.
In C.
Nikolaou and C.
Stephanidis, editors, Proceedings of the 2nd European Conference on Digital Libraries (ECDL'98), volume 1513 of LNCS, pages 409-428, Berlin.
Springer. Stephan Mehl, Hagen Langer, and Martin Volk.
1998. Statistische Verfahren zur Zuordnung von Pr~positionalphrasen.
In Bernhard SchrSder, Winfried Lenders, Wolfgang Hess, and Thomas Portele, editors, Proceedings of the ~th Conference on Natural Language Processing KONVENS-98, number 1 in Computers, Linguistics, and Phonetics between Language and Speech, pages 97-110, Frankfurt, Germany.
Peter Lang.
Paola Merlo, Matthew W.
Crocker, and Cathy Berthouzoz.
1997. Attaching multiple prepositional phrases: Generalized backed-off estimation.
In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-2), pages 149155, Providence, Rhode Island.
Brown University.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi, Jeff Reynar, and Salim Roukos.
1994. A maximum entropy model for prepositional phrase attachment.
In Proceedings of the ARPA Human Language Technology Workshop, pages 250-255.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi.
1998. Statistical models for unsupervised prepositional phrase attachment.
In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (COLING-A CL '98), pages 1079-1085.
Jiri Stetina and Makoto Nagao.
1997. Corpusbased PP attachment ambiguity resolution with a semantic dictionary.
In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Very Large Corpora (WVLC-5), pages 66-80.
Ingo Tjaden.
1996. Semantische Pr£positionsinterpretation im Rahmen der Wortklassengesteuerten Analyse.
Master's thesis, FernUniversit~it Hagen, Hagen.
Alexander S.
Yeh and Marc B.
Vilain. 1998.
Some properties of preposition and subordinate conjunction attachments.
In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Computational Linguistics and 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics "COLING-A CL'98), pages 14361442 .

